
Simple Linear Regression

Simple linear regression lives up to its name: it is a very straightforward
approach for predicting a quantitative response Y on the basis of a sin-
gle predictor variable X. It assumes that there is approximately a linear
relationship between X and Y . Mathematically, we can write this linear
relationship as
Y ≈ β0 + β1 X.
(3.1)
You might read “≈” as “is approximately modeled as”. We will sometimes
describe (3.1) by saying that we are regressing Y on X (or Y onto X).

For example, X may represent TV advertising and Y may represent sales.
Then we can regress sales onto TV by fitting the model
sales ≈ β0 + β1 × TV.

In Equation 3.1, β0 and β1 are two unknown constants that represent
the intercept and slope terms in the linear model. Together, β0 and β1 are
known as the model coefficients or parameters. Once we have used our
training data to produce estimates β̂0 and β̂1 for the model coefficients, we
can predict future sales on the basis of a particular value of TV advertising
by computing
ŷ = β̂0 + β̂1 x,
(3.2)
where ŷ indicates a prediction of Y on the basis of X = x. Here we use a
hat symbol, ˆ , to denote the estimated value for an unknown parameter
or coefficient, or to denote the predicted value of the response.

3.1.1

Estimating the Coefficients

In practice, β0 and β1 are unknown. So before we can use (3.1) to make
predictions, we must use data to estimate the coefficients. Let
(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xn , yn )
represent n observation pairs, each of which consists of a measurement of
X and a measurement of Y . In the Advertising example, this data set consists of the TV advertising budget and product sales in n = 200 different
markets. (Recall that the data are displayed in Figure 2.1.) Our goal is to
obtain coefficient estimates β̂0 and β̂1 such that the linear model (3.1) fits
the available data well—that is, so that yi ≈ β̂0 + β̂1 xi for i = 1, . . . , n. In
other words, we want to find an intercept β̂0 and a slope β̂1 such that the
resulting line is as close as possible to the n = 200 data points. There are
a number of ways of measuring closeness. However, by far the most common approach involves minimizing the least squares criterion, and we take
that approach in this chapter. Alternative approaches will be considered in
Chapter 6.
Let ŷi = β̂0 + β̂1 xi be the prediction for Y based on the ith value of X.
Then ei = yi − ŷi represents the ith residual—this is the difference between
the ith observed response value and the ith response value that is predicted
by our linear model. We define the residual sum of squares (RSS) as
or equivalently as

RSS = e21 + e22 + · · · + e2n ,

RSS = (y1 − β̂0 − β̂1 x1 )2 + (y2 − β̂0 − β̂1 x2 )2 + · · · + (yn − β̂0 − β̂1 xn )2 . (3.3)

The least squares approach chooses β̂0 and β̂1 to minimize the RSS. Using
some calculus, one can show that the minimizers are
)n
(x − x̄)(yi − ȳ)
)n i
β̂1 = i=1
,
(3.4)
i=1 (xi − x̄)
β̂0 = ȳ − β̂1 x̄,

FIGURE 3.1. For the Advertising data, the least squares fit for the regression
of sales onto TV is shown. The fit is found by minimizing the residual sum of
squares. Each grey line segment represents a residual. In this case a linear fit
captures the essence of the relationship, although it overestimates the trend in the
left of the plot.

)n
)n
where ȳ ≡ n1 i=1 yi and x̄ ≡ n1 i=1 xi are the sample means. In other
words, (3.4) defines the least squares coefficient estimates for simple linear
regression.
Figure 3.1 displays the simple linear regression fit to the Advertising
data, where β̂0 = 7.03 and β̂1 = 0.0475. In other words, according to
this approximation, an additional $1,000 spent on TV advertising is associated with selling approximately 47.5 additional units of the product. In
Figure 3.2, we have computed RSS for a number of values of β0 and β1 ,
using the advertising data with sales as the response and TV as the predictor. In each plot, the red dot represents the pair of least squares estimates
(β̂0 , β̂1 ) given by (3.4). These values clearly minimize the RSS.

3.1.2

Assessing the Accuracy of the Coefficient Estimates

Recall from (2.1) that we assume that the true relationship between X and
Y takes the form Y = f (X) + " for some unknown function f , where "
is a mean-zero random error term. If f is to be approximated by a linear
function, then we can write this relationship as
Y = β0 + β1 X + ".

(3.5)

Here β0 is the intercept term—that is, the expected value of Y when X = 0,
and β1 is the slope—the average increase in Y associated with a one-unit
increase in X. The error term is a catch-all for what we miss with this
simple model: the true relationship is probably not linear, there may be
other variables that cause variation in Y , and there may be measurement
error. We typically assume that the error term is independent of X.

FIGURE 3.2. Contour and three-dimensional plots of the RSS on the
Advertising data, using sales as the response and TV as the predictor. The
red dots correspond to the least squares estimates β̂0 and β̂1 , given by (3.4).

The model given by (3.5) defines the population regression line, which
is the best linear approximation to the true relationship between X and
Y .1 The least squares regression coefficient estimates (3.4) characterize the
least squares line (3.2). The left-hand panel of Figure 3.3 displays these
two lines in a simple simulated example. We created 100 random Xs, and
generated 100 corresponding Y s from the model
Y = 2 + 3X + ",

(3.6)

where " was generated from a normal distribution with mean zero. The
red line in the left-hand panel of Figure 3.3 displays the true relationship,
f (X) = 2 + 3X, while the blue line is the least squares estimate based
on the observed data. The true relationship is generally not known for
real data, but the least squares line can always be computed using the
coefficient estimates given in (3.4). In other words, in real applications,
we have access to a set of observations from which we can compute the
least squares line; however, the population regression line is unobserved.
In the right-hand panel of Figure 3.3 we have generated ten different data
sets from the model given by (3.6) and plotted the corresponding ten least
squares lines. Notice that different data sets generated from the same true
model result in slightly different least squares lines, but the unobserved
population regression line does not change.
At first glance, the difference between the population regression line and
the least squares line may seem subtle and confusing. We only have one
data set, and so what does it mean that two different lines describe the
relationship between the predictor and the response? Fundamentally, the
concept of these two lines is a natural extension of the standard statistical
approach of using information from a sample to estimate characteristics of a
large population. For example, suppose that we are interested in knowing
1 The assumption of linearity is often a useful working model. However, despite what
many textbooks might tell us, we seldom believe that the true relationship is linear.

FIGURE 3.3. A simulated data set. Left: The red line represents the true
relationship, f (X) = 2 + 3X, which is known as the population regression line.
The blue line is the least squares line; it is the least squares estimate for f (X)
based on the observed data, shown in black. Right: The population regression line
is again shown in red, and the least squares line in dark blue. In light blue, ten
least squares lines are shown, each computed on the basis of a separate random
set of observations. Each least squares line is different, but on average, the least
squares lines are quite close to the population regression line.

the population mean µ of some random variable Y . Unfortunately, µ is
unknown, but we do have access to n observations from Y , y1 , . . . , yn ,
which )
we can use to estimate µ. A reasonable estimate is µ̂ = ȳ, where
n
ȳ = n1 i=1 yi is the sample mean. The sample mean and the population
mean are different, but in general the sample mean will provide a good
estimate of the population mean. In the same way, the unknown coefficients
β0 and β1 in linear regression define the population regression line. We seek
to estimate these unknown coefficients using β̂0 and β̂1 given in (3.4). These
coefficient estimates define the least squares line.
The analogy between linear regression and estimation of the mean of a
random variable is an apt one based on the concept of bias. If we use the
sample mean µ̂ to estimate µ, this estimate is unbiased, in the sense that
on average, we expect µ̂ to equal µ. What exactly does this mean? It means
that on the basis of one particular set of observations y1 , . . . , yn , µ̂ might
overestimate µ, and on the basis of another set of observations, µ̂ might
underestimate µ. But if we could average a huge number of estimates of
µ obtained from a huge number of sets of observations, then this average
would exactly equal µ. Hence, an unbiased estimator does not systematically
over- or under-estimate the true parameter. The property of unbiasedness
holds for the least squares coefficient estimates given by (3.4) as well: if
we estimate β0 and β1 on the basis of a particular data set, then our
estimates won’t be exactly equal to β0 and β1 . But if we could average
the estimates obtained over a huge number of data sets, then the average
of these estimates would be spot on! In fact, we can see from the righthand panel of Figure 3.3 that the average of many least squares lines, each

estimated from a separate data set, is pretty close to the true population
regression line.
We continue the analogy with the estimation of the population mean
µ of a random variable Y . A natural question is as follows: how accurate
is the sample mean µ̂ as an estimate of µ? We have established that the
average of µ̂’s over many data sets will be very close to µ, but that a
single estimate µ̂ may be a substantial underestimate or overestimate of µ.
How far off will that single estimate of µ̂ be? In general, we answer this
question by computing the standard error of µ̂, written as SE(µ̂). We have
the well-known formula
Var(µ̂) = SE(µ̂) =

σ2
,
n

(3.7)

where σ is the standard deviation of each of the realizations yi of Y .2
Roughly speaking, the standard error tells us the average amount that this
estimate µ̂ differs from the actual value of µ. Equation 3.7 also tells us how
this deviation shrinks with n—the more observations we have, the smaller
the standard error of µ̂. In a similar vein, we can wonder how close β̂0
and β̂1 are to the true values β0 and β1 . To compute the standard errors
associated with β̂0 and β̂1 , we use the following formulas:
x̄2
σ2
SE(β̂0 ) = σ 2
+ )n
, SE(β̂1 ) = )n
, (3.8)
n
i=1 (xi − x̄)
i=1 (xi − x̄)

where σ 2 = Var("). For these formulas to be strictly valid, we need to
assume that the errors "i for each observation have common variance σ 2 and
are uncorrelated. This is clearly not true in Figure 3.1, but the formula still
turns out to be a good approximation. Notice in the formula that SE(β̂1 ) is
smaller when the xi are more spread out; intuitively we have more leverage
to estimate a slope when this is the case. We also see that SE(β̂0 ) would be
the same as SE(µ̂) if x̄ were zero (in which case β̂0 would be equal to ȳ). In
general, σ 2 is not known, but can be estimated from the data. This estimate
of σ is
known as the residual standard error, and is given by the formula
RSE = RSS/(n − 2). Strictly speaking, when σ 2 is estimated from the data we should write SE(β̂1 ) to indicate that an estimate has been made,
but for simplicity of notation we will drop this extra “hat”.
Standard errors can be used to compute confidence intervals. A 95 %
confidence interval is defined as a range of values such that with 95 %
probability, the range will contain the true unknown value of the parameter. The range is defined in terms of lower and upper limits computed
from the sample of data. A 95% confidence interval has the following property: if we take repeated samples and construct the confidence interval for
each sample, 95% of the intervals will contain the true unknown value of
the parameter. For linear regression, the 95 % confidence interval for β1
approximately takes the form
β̂1 ± 2 · SE(β̂1 ).
2 This formula holds provided that the n observations are uncorrelated.

(3.9)

That is, there is approximately a 95 % chance that the interval
β̂1 − 2 · SE(β̂1 ), β̂1 + 2 · SE(β̂1 )

(3.10)

will contain the true value of β1 .3 Similarly, a confidence interval for β0
approximately takes the form
β̂0 ± 2 · SE(β̂0 ).

(3.11)

In the case of the advertising data, the 95 % confidence interval for β0
is [6.130, 7.935] and the 95 % confidence interval for β1 is [0.042, 0.053].
Therefore, we can conclude that in the absence of any advertising, sales will,
on average, fall somewhere between 6,130 and 7,935 units. Furthermore,
for each $1,000 increase in television advertising, there will be an average
increase in sales of between 42 and 53 units.
Standard errors can also be used to perform hypothesis tests on the
coefficients. The most common hypothesis test involves testing the null test
hypothesis of
H0 : There is no relationship between X and Y

(3.12)

versus the alternative hypothesis
Ha : There is some relationship between X and Y .

(3.13)

Mathematically, this corresponds to testing
H0 : β 1 = 0
versus
Ha : β1 %= 0,

since if β1 = 0 then the model (3.5) reduces to Y = β0 + ", and X is
not associated with Y . To test the null hypothesis, we need to determine
whether β̂1 , our estimate for β1 , is sufficiently far from zero that we can
be confident that β1 is non-zero. How far is far enough? This of course
depends on the accuracy of β̂1 —that is, it depends on SE(β̂1 ). If SE(β̂1 ) is
small, then even relatively small values of β̂1 may provide strong evidence
that β1 %= 0, and hence that there is a relationship between X and Y . In
contrast, if SE(β̂1 ) is large, then β̂1 must be large in absolute value in order
for us to reject the null hypothesis. In practice, we compute a t-statistic,
given by
β̂1 − 0
t=
,
(3.14)
SE(β̂1 )
3 Approximately for several reasons. Equation 3.10 relies on the assumption that the
errors are Gaussian. Also, the factor of 2 in front of the SE(β̂1 ) term will vary slightly
depending on the number of observations n in the linear regression. To be precise, rather
than the number 2, (3.10) should contain the 97.5 % quantile of a t-distribution with
n−2 degrees of freedom. Details of how to compute the 95 % confidence interval precisely
in R will be provided later in this chapter.

Intercept

Coefficient

Std. error

< 0.0001
< 0.0001

TABLE 3.1. For the Advertising data, coefficients of the least squares model
for the regression of number of units sold on TV advertising budget. An increase
of $1,000 in the TV advertising budget is associated with an increase in sales by
around 50 units. (Recall that the sales variable is in thousands of units, and the
TV variable is in thousands of dollars.)

which measures the number of standard deviations that β̂1 is away from 0. If
there really is no relationship between X and Y , then we expect that (3.14)
will have a t-distribution with n − 2 degrees of freedom. The t-distribution
has a bell shape and for values of n greater than approximately 30 it is
quite similar to the standard normal distribution. Consequently, it is a
simple matter to compute the probability of observing any number equal
to |t| or larger in absolute value, assuming β1 = 0. We call this probability
the p-value. Roughly speaking, we interpret the p-value as follows: a small
p-value indicates that it is unlikely to observe such a substantial association
between the predictor and the response due to chance, in the absence of
any real association between the predictor and the response. Hence, if we
see a small p-value, then we can infer that there is an association between
the predictor and the response. We reject the null hypothesis—that is, we
declare a relationship to exist between X and Y —if the p-value is small
enough. Typical p-value cutoffs for rejecting the null hypothesis are 5% or
1%, although this topic will be explored in much greater detail in Chapter 13. When n = 30, these correspond to t-statistics (3.14) of around 2
and 2.75, respectively.
Table 3.1 provides details of the least squares model for the regression of
number of units sold on TV advertising budget for the Advertising data.
Notice that the coefficients for β̂0 and β̂1 are very large relative to their
standard errors, so the t-statistics are also large; the probabilities of seeing
such values if H0 is true are virtually zero. Hence we can conclude that
β0 %= 0 and β1 %= 0.4

3.1.3

Assessing the Accuracy of the Model

Once we have rejected the null hypothesis (3.12) in favor of the alternative
hypothesis (3.13), it is natural to want to quantify the extent to which the
model fits the data. The quality of a linear regression fit is typically assessed
using two related quantities: the residual standard error (RSE) and the R2 2
R
statistic.
4 In Table 3.1, a small p-value for the intercept indicates that we can reject the null
hypothesis that β0 = 0, and a small p-value for TV indicates that we can reject the null
hypothesis that β1 = 0. Rejecting the latter null hypothesis allows us to conclude that
there is a relationship between TV and sales. Rejecting the former allows us to conclude
that in the absence of TV expenditure, sales are non-zero.

Quantity
Residual standard error
R2
F -statistic

Value

TABLE 3.2. For the Advertising data, more information about the least
squares model for the regression of number of units sold on TV advertising budget.

Table 3.2 displays the RSE, the R2 statistic, and the F -statistic (to be
described in Section 3.2.2) for the linear regression of number of units sold
on TV advertising budget.
Residual Standard Error
Recall from the model (3.5) that associated with each observation is an
error term ". Due to the presence of these error terms, even if we knew the
true regression line (i.e. even if β0 and β1 were known), we would not be
able to perfectly predict Y from X. The RSE is an estimate of the
deviation of ". Roughly speaking, it is the average amount that the response
will deviate from the true regression line. It is computed using the formula
:
;
n
; 1 0
RSE =
RSS = <
(yi − ŷi )2 .
(3.15)
n−2
n − 2 i=1
Note that RSS was defined in Section 3.1.1, and is given by the formula
RSS =

n
i=1

(yi − ŷi )2 .

(3.16)

In the case of the advertising data, we see from the linear regression
output in Table 3.2 that the RSE is 3.26. In other words, actual sales in
each market deviate from the true regression line by approximately 3,260
units, on average. Another way to think about this is that even if the
model were correct and the true values of the unknown coefficients β0
and β1 were known exactly, any prediction of sales on the basis of TV
advertising would still be off by about 3,260 units on average. Of course,
whether or not 3,260 units is an acceptable prediction error depends on the
problem context. In the advertising data set, the mean value of sales over
all markets is approximately 14,000 units, and so the percentage error is
3,260/14,000 = 23 %.
The RSE is considered a measure of the lack of fit of the model (3.5) to
the data. If the predictions obtained using the model are very close to the
true outcome values—that is, if ŷi ≈ yi for i = 1, . . . , n—then (3.15) will
be small, and we can conclude that the model fits the data very well. On
the other hand, if ŷi is very far from yi for one or more observations, then
the RSE may be quite large, indicating that the model doesn’t fit the data
well.
R2 Statistic
The RSE provides an absolute measure of lack of fit of the model (3.5)
to the data. But since it is measured in the units of Y , it is not always

clear what constitutes a good RSE. The R2 statistic provides an alternative
measure of fit. It takes the form of a proportion—the proportion of variance
explained—and so it always takes on a value between 0 and 1, and is
independent of the scale of Y .
To calculate R2 , we use the formula
R2 =

TSS − RSS
=1−
TSS
TSS

(3.17)

)
where TSS = (yi − ȳ)2 is the total sum of squares, and RSS is defined
in (3.16). TSS measures the total variance in the response Y , and can be squares
thought of as the amount of variability inherent in the response before the
regression is performed. In contrast, RSS measures the amount of variability
that is left unexplained after performing the regression. Hence, TSS − RSS
measures the amount of variability in the response that is explained (or
removed) by performing the regression, and R2 measures the proportion of
variability in Y that can be explained using X. An R2 statistic that is close
to 1 indicates that a large proportion of the variability in the response is
explained by the regression. A number near 0 indicates that the regression
does not explain much of the variability in the response; this might occur
because the linear model is wrong, or the error variance σ 2 is high, or both.
In Table 3.2, the R2 was 0.61, and so just under two-thirds of the variability
in sales is explained by a linear regression on TV.
The R2 statistic (3.17) has an interpretational advantage over the RSE
(3.15), since unlike the RSE, it always lies between 0 and 1. However, it can
still be challenging to determine what is a good R2 value, and in general,
this will depend on the application. For instance, in certain problems in
physics, we may know that the data truly comes from a linear model with
a small residual error. In this case, we would expect to see an R2 value that
is extremely close to 1, and a substantially smaller R2 value might indicate a
serious problem with the experiment in which the data were generated. On
the other hand, in typical applications in biology, psychology, marketing,
and other domains, the linear model (3.5) is at best an extremely rough
approximation to the data, and residual errors due to other unmeasured
factors are often very large. In this setting, we would expect only a very
small proportion of the variance in the response to be explained by the
predictor, and an R2 value well below 0.1 might be more realistic!
The R2 statistic is a measure of the linear relationship between X and
Y . Recall that correlation, defined as
)n
(xi − x)(yi − y)
5)n
Cor(X, Y ) = 5)n i=1
,
(3.18)
i=1 (xi − x)
i=1 (yi − y)
is also a measure of the linear relationship between X and Y .5 This suggests that we might be able to use r = Cor(X, Y ) instead of R2 in order to
assess the fit of the linear model. In fact, it can be shown that in the simple
5 We note that in fact, the right-hand side of (3.18) is the sample correlation; thus,

!Y ); however, we omit the “hat” for ease of
it would be more correct to write Cor(X,
notation.

Simple regression of sales on radio
Coefficient Std. error t-statistic
Intercept
radio

< 0.0001
< 0.0001

Simple regression of sales on newspaper

Intercept
newspaper

Coefficient

Std. error

< 0.0001

TABLE 3.3. More simple linear regression models for the Advertising data.
Coefficients of the simple linear regression model for number of units sold on Top:
radio advertising budget and Bottom: newspaper advertising budget. A $1,000 increase in spending on radio advertising is associated with an average increase in
sales by around 203 units, while the same increase in spending on newspaper advertising is associated with an average increase in sales by around 55 units. (Note
that the sales variable is in thousands of units, and the radio and newspaper
variables are in thousands of dollars.)

linear regression setting, R2 = r2 . In other words, the squared correlation
and the R2 statistic are identical. However, in the next section we will
discuss the multiple linear regression problem, in which we use several predictors simultaneously to predict the response. The concept of correlation
between the predictors and the response does not extend automatically to
this setting, since correlation quantifies the association between a single
pair of variables rather than between a larger number of variables. We will
see that R2 fills this role.
