
Other Considerations in the Regression Model

3.3.1

Qualitative Predictors

In our discussion so far, we have assumed that all variables in our linear
regression model are quantitative. But in practice, this is not necessarily
the case; often some predictors are qualitative.
For example, the Credit data set displayed in Figure 3.6 records variables
for a number of credit card holders. The response is balance (average credit
card debt for each individual) and there are several quantitative predictors:
age, cards (number of credit cards), education (years of education), income
(in thousands of dollars), limit (credit limit), and rating (credit rating).
Each panel of Figure 3.6 is a scatterplot for a pair of variables whose identities are given by the corresponding row and column labels. For example,
the scatterplot directly to the right of the word “Balance” depicts balance
versus age, while the plot directly to the right of “Age” corresponds to
age versus cards. In addition to these quantitative variables, we also have
four qualitative variables: own (house ownership), student (student status),
status (marital status), and region (East, West or South).
Predictors with Only Two Levels
Suppose that we wish to investigate differences in credit card balance between those who own a house and those who don’t, ignoring the other variables for the moment. If a qualitative predictor (also known as a factor)
only has two levels, or possible values, then incorporating it into a regreslevel
sion model is very simple. We simply create an indicator or dummy variable
that takes on two possible numerical values.10 For example, based on the variable
own variable, we can create a new variable that takes the form
=
1
if ith person owns a house
xi =
(3.26)
0
if ith person does not own a house,
and use this variable as a predictor in the regression equation. This results
in the model
=
β0 + β1 + " i
if ith person owns a house
yi = β 0 + β 1 x i + " i =
(3.27)
β0 + " i
if ith person does not.
Now β0 can be interpreted as the average credit card balance among those
who do not own, β0 + β1 as the average credit card balance among those
who do own their house, and β1 as the average difference in credit card
balance between owners and non-owners.
Table 3.7 displays the coefficient estimates and other information associated with the model (3.27). The average credit card debt for non-owners
is estimated to be $509.80, whereas owners are estimated to carry $19.73
in additional debt for a total of $509.80 + $19.73 = $529.53. However, we
10 In the machine learning community, the creation of dummy variables to handle
qualitative predictors is known as “one-hot encoding”.

FIGURE 3.6. The Credit data set contains information about balance, age,
cards, education, income, limit, and rating for a number of potential customers.

notice that the p-value for the dummy variable is very high. This indicates
that there is no statistical evidence of a difference in average credit card
balance based on house ownership.
The decision to code owners as 1 and non-owners as 0 in (3.27) is arbitrary, and has no effect on the regression fit, but does alter the interpretation of the coefficients. If we had coded non-owners as 1 and owners as 0, then the estimates for β0 and β1 would have been 529.53 and
−19.73, respectively, leading once again to a prediction of credit card debt
of $529.53 − $19.73 = $509.80 for non-owners and a prediction of $529.53
for owners. Alternatively, instead of a 0/1 coding scheme, we could create
a dummy variable
=
1
if ith person owns a house
xi =
−1
if ith person does not own a house
and use this variable in the regression equation. This results in the model
=
β0 + β1 + " i
if ith person owns a house
yi = β0 +β1 xi +"i =
β0 − β1 + " i
if ith person does not own a house.

Intercept
own[Yes]

Coefficient
509.80

Std. error
33.13

t-statistic
15.389

p-value
< 0.0001
0.6690

TABLE 3.7. Least squares coefficient estimates associated with the regression
of balance onto own in the Credit data set. The linear model is given in (3.27).
That is, ownership is encoded as a dummy variable, as in (3.26).

Now β0 can be interpreted as the overall average credit card balance (ignoring the house ownership effect), and β1 is the amount by which house
owners and non-owners have credit card balances that are above and below
the average, respectively.11 In this example, the estimate for β0 is $519.665,
halfway between the non-owner and owner averages of $509.80 and $529.53.
The estimate for β1 is $9.865, which is half of $19.73, the average difference
between owners and non-owners. It is important to note that the final predictions for the credit balances of owners and non-owners will be identical
regardless of the coding scheme used. The only difference is in the way that
the coefficients are interpreted.
Qualitative Predictors with More than Two Levels
When a qualitative predictor has more than two levels, a single dummy
variable cannot represent all possible values. In this situation, we can create
additional dummy variables. For example, for the region variable we create
two dummy variables. The first could be
=
1
if ith person is from the South
xi1 =
(3.28)
0
if ith person is not from the South,
and the second could be
=
1
if ith person is from the West
xi2 =
0
if ith person is not from the West.

(3.29)

Then both of these variables can be used in the regression equation, in
order to obtain the model


β0 +β1 +!i
yi = β0 +β1 xi1 +β2 xi2 +!i = β0 +β2 +!i


β0 +!i

if ith person is from the South
if ith person is from the West
if ith person is from the East.
(3.30)

Now β0 can be interpreted as the average credit card balance for individuals
from the East, β1 can be interpreted as the difference in the average balance
between people from the South versus the East, and β2 can be interpreted
as the difference in the average balance between those from the West versus
the East. There will always be one fewer dummy variable than the number
of levels. The level with no dummy variable—East in this example—is
known as the baseline.
11 Technically β is half the sum of the average debt for house owners and the average
0
debt for non-house owners. Hence, β0 is exactly equal to the overall average only if the
two groups have an equal number of members.

Intercept
region[South]
region[West]

Coefficient
531.00

Std. error
46.32

t-statistic
11.464

p-value
< 0.0001
0.8260

TABLE 3.8. Least squares coefficient estimates associated with the regression of
balance onto region in the Credit data set. The linear model is given in (3.30).
That is, region is encoded via two dummy variables (3.28) and (3.29).

From Table 3.8, we see that the estimated balance for the baseline, East,
is $531.00. It is estimated that those in the South will have $18.69 less
debt than those in the East, and that those in the West will have $12.50
less debt than those in the East. However, the p-values associated with the
coefficient estimates for the two dummy variables are very large, suggesting
no statistical evidence of a real difference in average credit card balance
between South and East or between West and East.12 Once again, the
level selected as the baseline category is arbitrary, and the final predictions
for each group will be the same regardless of this choice. However, the
coefficients and their p-values do depend on the choice of dummy variable
coding. Rather than rely on the individual coefficients, we can use an F -test
to test H0 : β1 = β2 = 0; this does not depend on the coding. This F -test
has a p-value of 0.96, indicating that we cannot reject the null hypothesis
that there is no relationship between balance and region.
Using this dummy variable approach presents no difficulties when incorporating both quantitative and qualitative predictors. For example, to
regress balance on both a quantitative variable such as income and a qualitative variable such as student, we must simply create a dummy variable
for student and then fit a multiple regression model using income and the
dummy variable as predictors for credit card balance.
There are many different ways of coding qualitative variables besides
the dummy variable approach taken here. All of these approaches lead to
equivalent model fits, but the coefficients are different and have different
interpretations, and are designed to measure particular contrasts. This topic contrast
is beyond the scope of the book.

3.3.2

Extensions of the Linear Model

The standard linear regression model (3.19) provides interpretable results
and works quite well on many real-world problems. However, it makes several highly restrictive assumptions that are often violated in practice. Two
of the most important assumptions state that the relationship between the
predictors and response are additive and linear. The additivity assumption
additive
means that the association between a predictor Xj and the response Y does linear
not depend on the values of the other predictors. The linearity assumption
states that the change in the response Y associated with a one-unit change
in Xj is constant, regardless of the value of Xj . In later chapters of this
book, we examine a number of sophisticated methods that relax these two
12 There could still in theory be a difference between South and West, although the
data here does not suggest any difference.

assumptions. Here, we briefly examine some common classical approaches
for extending the linear model.
Removing the Additive Assumption
In our previous analysis of the Advertising data, we concluded that both TV
and radio seem to be associated with sales. The linear models that formed
the basis for this conclusion assumed that the effect on sales of increasing
one advertising medium is independent of the amount spent on the other
media. For example, the linear model (3.20) states that the average increase
in sales associated with a one-unit increase in TV is always β1 , regardless
of the amount spent on radio.
However, this simple model may be incorrect. Suppose that spending
money on radio advertising actually increases the effectiveness of TV advertising, so that the slope term for TV should increase as radio increases.
In this situation, given a fixed budget of $100,000, spending half on radio
and half on TV may increase sales more than allocating the entire amount
to either TV or to radio. In marketing, this is known as a synergy effect,
and in statistics it is referred to as an interaction effect. Figure 3.5 suggests that such an effect may be present in the advertising data. Notice
that when levels of either TV or radio are low, then the true sales are lower
than predicted by the linear model. But when advertising is split between
the two media, then the model tends to underestimate sales.
Consider the standard linear regression model with two variables,
Y = β0 + β1 X1 + β2 X2 + ".
According to this model, a one-unit increase in X1 is associated with an
average increase in Y of β1 units. Notice that the presence of X2 does
not alter this statement—that is, regardless of the value of X2 , a oneunit increase in X1 is associated with a β1 -unit increase in Y . One way of
extending this model is to include a third predictor, called an interaction
term, which is constructed by computing the product of X1 and X2 . This
results in the model
Y = β0 + β1 X1 + β2 X2 + β3 X1 X2 + ".

(3.31)

How does inclusion of this interaction term relax the additive assumption?
Notice that (3.31) can be rewritten as
Y

=
=

β0 + (β1 + β3 X2 )X1 + β2 X2 + "
β0 + β̃1 X1 + β2 X2 + "

(3.32)

where β̃1 = β1 + β3 X2 . Since β̃1 is now a function of X2 , the association
between X1 and Y is no longer constant: a change in the value of X2 will
change the association between X1 and Y . A similar argument shows that
a change in the value of X1 changes the association between X2 and Y .
For example, suppose that we are interested in studying the productivity of a factory. We wish to predict the number of units produced on the
basis of the number of production lines and the total number of workers.
It seems likely that the effect of increasing the number of production lines

Intercept
TV
radio
TV×radio

Coefficient
6.7502

Std. error
0.248

t-statistic
27.23

p-value
< 0.0001
< 0.0001
0.0014
< 0.0001

TABLE 3.9. For the Advertising data, least squares coefficient estimates associated with the regression of sales onto TV and radio, with an interaction term,
as in (3.33).

will depend on the number of workers, since if no workers are available
to operate the lines, then increasing the number of lines will not increase
production. This suggests that it would be appropriate to include an interaction term between lines and workers in a linear model to predict units.
Suppose that when we fit the model, we obtain
units

≈
=

1.2 + 3.4 × lines + 0.22 × workers + 1.4 × (lines × workers)
1.2 + (3.4 + 1.4 × workers) × lines + 0.22 × workers.

In other words, adding an additional line will increase the number of units
produced by 3.4 + 1.4 × workers. Hence the more workers we have, the
stronger will be the effect of lines.
We now return to the Advertising example. A linear model that uses
radio, TV, and an interaction between the two to predict sales takes the
form
sales

=
=

β0 + β1 × TV + β2 × radio + β3 × (radio × TV) + "
β0 + (β1 + β3 × radio) × TV + β2 × radio + ".
(3.33)

We can interpret β3 as the increase in the effectiveness of TV advertising
associated with a one-unit increase in radio advertising (or vice-versa). The
coefficients that result from fitting the model (3.33) are given in Table 3.9.
The results in Table 3.9 strongly suggest that the model that includes the
interaction term is superior to the model that contains only main effects.
main effect
The p-value for the interaction term, TV×radio, is extremely low, indicating
that there is strong evidence for Ha : β3 %= 0. In other words, it is clear that
the true relationship is not additive. The R2 for the model (3.33) is 96.8 %,
compared to only 89.7 % for the model that predicts sales using TV and
radio without an interaction term. This means that (96.8 − 89.7)/(100 −
89.7) = 69 % of the variability in sales that remains after fitting the additive model has been explained by the interaction term. The coefficient
estimates in Table 3.9 suggest that an increase in TV advertising of $1,000 is
associated with increased sales of (β̂1 + β̂3 × radio)×1,000 = 19+1.1× radio
units. And an increase in radio advertising of $1,000 will be associated with
an increase in sales of (β̂2 + β̂3 × TV) × 1,000 = 29 + 1.1 × TV units.
In this example, the p-values associated with TV, radio, and the interaction term all are statistically significant (Table 3.9), and so it is obvious
that all three variables should be included in the model. However, it is
sometimes the case that an interaction term has a very small p-value, but
the associated main effects (in this case, TV and radio) do not. The hierarchical principle states that if we include an interaction in a model, we

hierarchical
principle

should also include the main effects, even if the p-values associated with
their coefficients are not significant. In other words, if the interaction between X1 and X2 seems important, then we should include both X1 and
X2 in the model even if their coefficient estimates have large p-values. The
rationale for this principle is that if X1 × X2 is related to the response,
then whether or not the coefficients of X1 or X2 are exactly zero is of little interest. Also X1 × X2 is typically correlated with X1 and X2 , and so
leaving them out tends to alter the meaning of the interaction.
In the previous example, we considered an interaction between TV and
radio, both of which are quantitative variables. However, the concept of
interactions applies just as well to qualitative variables, or to a combination
of quantitative and qualitative variables. In fact, an interaction between
a qualitative variable and a quantitative variable has a particularly nice
interpretation. Consider the Credit data set from Section 3.3.1, and suppose
that we wish to predict balance using the income (quantitative) and student
(qualitative) variables. In the absence of an interaction term, the model
takes the form
=
β2
if ith person is a student
balancei ≈ β0 + β1 × incomei +
0
if ith person is not a student
=
β0 + β2
if ith person is a student
= β1 × incomei +
β0
if ith person is not a student.
(3.34)
Notice that this amounts to fitting two parallel lines to the data, one for
students and one for non-students. The lines for students and non-students
have different intercepts, β0 + β2 versus β0 , but the same slope, β1 . This
is illustrated in the left-hand panel of Figure 3.7. The fact that the lines
are parallel means that the average effect on balance of a one-unit increase
in income does not depend on whether or not the individual is a student.
This represents a potentially serious limitation of the model, since in fact a
change in income may have a very different effect on the credit card balance
of a student versus a non-student.
This limitation can be addressed by adding an interaction variable, created by multiplying income with the dummy variable for student. Our
model now becomes
=
β2 + β3 × incomei if student
balancei ≈ β0 + β1 × incomei +
0
if not student
=
(β0 + β2 ) + (β1 + β3 ) × incomei if student
=
β0 + β1 × incomei
if not student.
(3.35)

Once again, we have two different regression lines for the students and
the non-students. But now those regression lines have different intercepts,
β0 +β2 versus β0 , as well as different slopes, β1 +β3 versus β1 . This allows for
the possibility that changes in income may affect the credit card balances
of students and non-students differently. The right-hand panel of Figure 3.7

student
non−student

FIGURE 3.7. For the Credit data, the least squares lines are shown for prediction of balance from income for students and non-students. Left: The model
(3.34) was fit. There is no interaction between income and student. Right: The
model (3.35) was fit. There is an interaction term between income and student.

shows the estimated relationships between income and balance for students
and non-students in the model (3.35). We note that the slope for students
is lower than the slope for non-students. This suggests that increases in
income are associated with smaller increases in credit card balance among
students as compared to non-students.
Non-linear Relationships
As discussed previously, the linear regression model (3.19) assumes a linear
relationship between the response and predictors. But in some cases, the
true relationship between the response and the predictors may be nonlinear. Here we present a very simple way to directly extend the linear model
to accommodate non-linear relationships, using polynomial regression. In
polynomial
later chapters, we will present more complex approaches for performing regression
non-linear fits in more general settings.
Consider Figure 3.8, in which the mpg (gas mileage in miles per gallon)
versus horsepower is shown for a number of cars in the Auto data set. The
orange line represents the linear regression fit. There is a pronounced relationship between mpg and horsepower, but it seems clear that this relationship is in fact non-linear: the data suggest a curved relationship. A simple
approach for incorporating non-linear associations in a linear model is to
include transformed versions of the predictors. For example, the points in
Figure 3.8 seem to have a quadratic shape, suggesting that a model of the
quadratic
form
mpg = β0 + β1 × horsepower + β2 × horsepower2 + "

(3.36)

may provide a better fit. Equation 3.36 involves predicting mpg using a
non-linear function of horsepower. But it is still a linear model! That is,
(3.36) is simply a multiple linear regression model with X1 = horsepower
and X2 = horsepower2 . So we can use standard linear regression software to
estimate β0 , β1 , and β2 in order to produce a non-linear fit. The blue curve
in Figure 3.8 shows the resulting quadratic fit to the data. The quadratic

Miles per gallon

Linear
Degree 2
Degree 5

Horsepower

FIGURE 3.8. The Auto data set. For a number of cars, mpg and horsepower are
shown. The linear regression fit is shown in orange. The linear regression fit for a
model that includes horsepower2 is shown as a blue curve. The linear regression
fit for a model that includes all polynomials of horsepower up to fifth-degree is
shown in green.

Intercept
horsepower
horsepower2

Coefficient
56.9001

Std. error
1.8004

t-statistic
31.6

p-value
< 0.0001
< 0.0001
< 0.0001

TABLE 3.10. For the Auto data set, least squares coefficient estimates associated
with the regression of mpg onto horsepower and horsepower2 .

fit appears to be substantially better than the fit obtained when just the
linear term is included. The R2 of the quadratic fit is 0.688, compared to
0.606 for the linear fit, and the p-value in Table 3.10 for the quadratic term
is highly significant.
If including horsepower2 led to such a big improvement in the model, why
not include horsepower3 , horsepower4 , or even horsepower5 ? The green curve
in Figure 3.8 displays the fit that results from including all polynomials up
to fifth degree in the model (3.36). The resulting fit seems unnecessarily
wiggly—that is, it is unclear that including the additional terms really has
led to a better fit to the data.
The approach that we have just described for extending the linear model
to accommodate non-linear relationships is known as polynomial regression, since we have included polynomial functions of the predictors in the
regression model. We further explore this approach and other non-linear
extensions of the linear model in Chapter 7.

3.3.3

Potential Problems

When we fit a linear regression model to a particular data set, many problems may occur. Most common among these are the following:
1. Non-linearity of the response-predictor relationships.
2. Correlation of error terms.
3. Non-constant variance of error terms.
4. Outliers.
5. High-leverage points.
6. Collinearity.
In practice, identifying and overcoming these problems is as much an
art as a science. Many pages in countless books have been written on this
topic. Since the linear regression model is not our primary focus here, we
will provide only a brief summary of some key points.
1. Non-linearity of the Data
Residual Plot for Quadratic Fit

0
−15 −10

−15 −10

Residual Plot for Linear Fit

FIGURE 3.9. Plots of residuals versus predicted (or fitted) values for the Auto
data set. In each plot, the red line is a smooth fit to the residuals, intended to make
it easier to identify a trend. Left: A linear regression of mpg on horsepower. A
strong pattern in the residuals indicates non-linearity in the data. Right: A linear
regression of mpg on horsepower and horsepower2 . There is little pattern in the
residuals.

The linear regression model assumes that there is a straight-line relationship between the predictors and the response. If the true relationship
is far from linear, then virtually all of the conclusions that we draw from
the fit are suspect. In addition, the prediction accuracy of the model can
be significantly reduced.
Residual plots are a useful graphical tool for identifying non-linearity.
residual plot
Given a simple linear regression model, we can plot the residuals, ei =

yi − ŷi , versus the predictor xi . In the case of a multiple regression model,
since there are multiple predictors, we instead plot the residuals versus
the predicted (or fitted) values ŷi . Ideally, the residual plot will show no
fitted
discernible pattern. The presence of a pattern may indicate a problem with
some aspect of the linear model.
The left panel of Figure 3.9 displays a residual plot from the linear regression of mpg onto horsepower on the Auto data set that was illustrated in
Figure 3.8. The red line is a smooth fit to the residuals, which is displayed in
order to make it easier to identify any trends. The residuals exhibit a clear
U-shape, which provides a strong indication of non-linearity in the data.
In contrast, the right-hand panel of Figure 3.9 displays the residual plot
that results from the model (3.36), which contains a quadratic term. There
appears to be little pattern in the residuals, suggesting that the quadratic
term improves the fit to the data.
If the residual plot indicates that there are non-linear associations in the
data, then a simple approach
√ is to use non-linear transformations of the
predictors, such as log X, X, and X 2 , in the regression model. In the
later chapters of this book, we will discuss other more advanced non-linear
approaches for addressing this issue.
2. Correlation of Error Terms
An important assumption of the linear regression model is that the error
terms, "1 , "2 , . . . , "n , are uncorrelated. What does this mean? For instance,
if the errors are uncorrelated, then the fact that "i is positive provides
little or no information about the sign of "i+1 . The standard errors that
are computed for the estimated regression coefficients or the fitted values
are based on the assumption of uncorrelated error terms. If in fact there is
correlation among the error terms, then the estimated standard errors will
tend to underestimate the true standard errors. As a result, confidence and
prediction intervals will be narrower than they should be. For example,
a 95 % confidence interval may in reality have a much lower probability
than 0.95 of containing the true value of the parameter. In addition, pvalues associated with the model will be lower than they should be; this
could cause us to erroneously conclude that a parameter is statistically
significant. In short, if the error terms are correlated, we may have an
unwarranted sense of confidence in our model.
As an extreme example, suppose we accidentally doubled our data, leading to observations and error terms identical in pairs. If we ignored this, our
standard error calculations would be as if we had a sample of size 2n, when
in fact we have only n samples. Our estimated parameters would be the
same for the 2n samples as for the√n samples, but the confidence intervals
would be narrower by a factor of 2!
Why might correlations among the error terms occur? Such correlations
frequently occur in the context of time series data, which consists of obtime series
servations for which measurements are obtained at discrete points in time.
In many cases, observations that are obtained at adjacent time points will
have positively correlated errors. In order to determine if this is the case for
a given data set, we can plot the residuals from our model as a function of
time. If the errors are uncorrelated, then there should be no discernible pat-

1
−1 0
−3

ρ=0.0

ρ=0.5

ρ=0.9

Observation

FIGURE 3.10. Plots of residuals from simulated time series data sets generated
with differing levels of correlation ρ between error terms for adjacent time points.

tern. On the other hand, if the error terms are positively correlated, then
we may see tracking in the residuals—that is, adjacent residuals may have
similar values. Figure 3.10 provides an illustration. In the top panel, we see
the residuals from a linear regression fit to data generated with uncorrelated errors. There is no evidence of a time-related trend in the residuals.
In contrast, the residuals in the bottom panel are from a data set in which
adjacent errors had a correlation of 0.9. Now there is a clear pattern in the
residuals—adjacent residuals tend to take on similar values. Finally, the
center panel illustrates a more moderate case in which the residuals had a
correlation of 0.5. There is still evidence of tracking, but the pattern is less
clear.
Many methods have been developed to properly take account of correlations in the error terms in time series data. Correlation among the error
terms can also occur outside of time series data. For instance, consider a
study in which individuals’ heights are predicted from their weights. The
assumption of uncorrelated errors could be violated if some of the individuals in the study are members of the same family, eat the same diet,
or have been exposed to the same environmental factors. In general, the
assumption of uncorrelated errors is extremely important for linear regression as well as for other statistical methods, and good experimental design
is crucial in order to mitigate the risk of such correlations.

Response log(Y)

Response Y

0.0
−0.8 −0.6 −0.4 −0.2

