CHAPTER 7

Framework for Investing:
The Capital Asset Pricing
Model (CAPM)
Although finance and investing have existed as long as there have been
markets to connect suppliers of capital (savers) with those who need capital (businesses), the beginnings of a rigorous framework for appraising
and designing portfolios did not really come into being until the midtwentieth century. The Capital Assets Pricing Model (CAPM) is one of
the most influential models developed to address this. Merton Miller,
Franco Modigliani, and William Sharpe shared a Nobel Prize in Economics in 1990 for their development of the CAPM.
To jump ahead for a moment, one of the core implications of CAPM
when combined with the Efficient Markets Hypothesis (EMH), which
will be described in the next chapter, is that very few investors can produce sustained returns superior to market averages. Therefore, CAPM
and EMH adherents asserted, buying “the market,” such as a stock market index, would produce superior results to most other strategies. Burton
Malkiel’s A Random Walk Down Wall Street was the first popular book on
indexing; first published in 1973, it has now appeared in over a dozen new
editions. John Bogle founded Vanguard Funds in the early 1970s to make
index investing available to retail customers.
Hedge funds are premised on the belief that it is in fact possible to
outperform a long-only market indexing strategy. So why spend a chapter
on a framework that seems to contradict this? Because CAPM has been
hugely influential in the investment community. And because it presents
a framework that allows us to break down investing performance into
component parts.

An Overview of CAPM
FIgure 7.1 shows daily price movements of a stock, ExxonMobil (ticker
symbol XOM) and an index, the S&P 500 (ticker symbol SPX), for about
1 year from late 2011 to late 2012.
You can see that prices of these two assets mostly move in tandem. But
there are periods where one moves by more, or less, than the other. This
suggests two things:
• There appears to be a strong relationship (positive correlation)
between XOM and SPX—that is, most events seem to affect
both assets in the same general way.
• Changes in XOM do not appear (for the most part) to be
quite as pronounced as changes in SPX.
Clearly, relative price movements for a given stock—in this case XOM—
compared to the overall market—captured in the S&P 500 index, SPX—
deserve attention. But there may also be a systematic difference in a
stock’s returns, aside from the portion of its returns that seem to relate
to broader market movements. That is the core of CAPM: distinguishing
XOM and S&P 500 cumulative returns
1.050
1.000

Relative price

0.950
0.900
0.850

XOM
S&P 500

0.800
0.750
0.700
0.650

8/

1/
9/ 11
10 /11
/1
11 /11
/1
12 /11
/1
/
1/ 11
1/
2/ 12
1/
3/ 12
1/
4/ 12
1/
5/ 12
1/
6/ 12
1/
7/ 12
1/
8/ 12
1/

0.600

Date

Figure 7.1 Daily price movements for XOM and SPX

between stock returns that derive from broad market movements and
those that do not.

The ABCs of CAPM: Alphas, Betas, and Correlations
Figure 7.2 shows the price changes (i.e., the daily returns in percent) in
XOM and SPX. In many instances, the two series are indistinguishable,
a sign that whatever affects the overall market (SPX) is also affecting ExxonMobil (XOM). Recall that returns are simply
[(Price at time t/Price at time t – 1) – 1].
The most basic measure of the relationship between movements in XOM’s
price and SPX is correlation. In a simple form, a correlation coefficient
measures the frequency with which prices of two assets move in the same
direction. Correlation coefficients can be as follows:
• –1.0—a perfect negative relationship. Whenever the S&P
rises, XOM falls, and vice versa.
• 0—no visible relationship.
• +1.0—a perfect positive relationship. Whenever the S&P
rises, XOM rises, and vice versa.
0.03
0.02

$SPX
XOM

Daily returns (%)

0.01
0.00
–0.01
–0.02
–0.03
–0.04
–0.05

Jan 14 2007 Jan 28 2007 Feb 11 2007 Feb 25 2007 Mar 11 2007
Date

Figure 7.2 Daily percentage change in price for SPX and XOM

Correlations among financial instruments will be essential elements of
portfolio construction, discussed in a later chapter. In general, combining
assets with low or negative correlations to each other—that is, correlation
coefficients that are near zero, or even negative—dampens a portfolio’s
volatility (i.e., lowers risk).
The essence of CAPM is illustrated in Figure 7.3. This is a scatter plot
of XOM’s daily returns versus those of SPX. Each dot represents one day of
data—the horizontal location indicates the change in SPX, while the vertical
location is the change in XOM. This pattern of a generally upward-­sloping
oval-shaped scatter is very common: On days when the overall market is
driven upward (i.e., when there are more buyers than sellers), the same is
true of XOM. This implies the correlation coefficient is positive (between 0
and 1). If XOM benefitted from events that hurt the overall market (or vice
versa), the general shape of the scatter would be downward, and the SPX and
XOM correlation coefficient would be negative (between –1 and 0).
As shown in Figure 7.3, we can fit a regression line through this scatter to find the linear equation that best captures its pattern. All linear
equations have the general form Y = b × X + a; in this example:
Return (XOM) = beta × Return (SPX) + alpha
0.20
0.15
0.10

XOM

0.05
0.00
–0.05
–0.10
–0.15
–0.20
–0.15

–0.10

–0.05

0.00
SPX

0.05

0.10

0.15

Figure 7.3 Scatter graph of XOM return versus market return, with
regression line

where alpha is the Y-intercept of the regression line, and beta is its slope.
We can interpret these ABCs—alphas, betas, and correlations—as
follows:
• Alpha is the systematic difference in performance (return)
of a stock over and above the market. Positive alpha could
come from superior management, production technology, or
product design; or from having a dominant position in the
company’s market that provides it pricing power (the ability
to raise prices without losing many customers). Alpha is the
intercept of the regression line in Figure 4.3. Since collectively
all stocks cannot beat the market because together they are the
market, alpha is assumed to be zero on average. (Any stock
with positive alphas is counterbalanced by other stocks with
negative alphas.)
• Beta represents the stock’s price volatility relative to the
overall market. Simply put, a stock with a beta of, say, 1.5
will rise on average 1.5 times as much, and fall 1.5 times
as much, as the overall market, in percentage terms. Small,
speculative companies usually have betas well above 1.0,
while large companies with very stable earnings usually have
betas well under 1.0. XOM’s beta is 0.77; it isn’t surprising
that a large company whose fortunes are so intertwined with
other companies (through oil supplier relationships) would
see its stock move almost as much as the overall market. The
market’s beta is by definition 1.0. Beta is the slope of the
regression line as shown in Figure 7.3. You can find a stock’s
beta on many investing websites, such as Google Finance or
Yahoo Finance.
• Correlation coefficients capture the “tightness” of the scatter
around the regression line, which summarizes the pattern in
that scatter. The higher (closer to 1.0) the correlation between
XOM and SPX, the more that XOM’s price movements are
explained by movements in SPX. Said differently, a high correlation coefficient suggests that events that affect prices in the
overall market have similar effects on the price of XOM.

Implications of CAPM
A fund manager can derive return from beta and alpha: When returns are
based primarily on an upward general market we call this buying beta. On
the other hand, returns resulting from investment skill are known as seeking alpha. As noted earlier, extensive study of the mutual fund industry
finds little evidence of persistent alpha among fund managers.
So CAPM allows the most basic disaggregation of an investment’s
performance into two parts: based on market return (which could be
achieved simply by buying an index)—beta; and based on company-­
specific factors—alpha. Since there are extremely inexpensive ways to
guarantee a beta of 1.0 by buying index funds or ETFs, outperforming
the market entails investing in stocks more volatile than the index (buying
beta), or finding stocks that systematically outperform (buying alpha).
Buying beta means, by definition, buying increased risk, since high beta
stocks not only rise faster than the index on “up” days, but also fall farther
on “down” days. Buying alpha is the oft-sought, but rarely achieved goal.

Basic Hedge Fund Strategies in the CAPM Framework
Hedge funds are so called because the first hedge fund, Albert Winslow
Jones’ fund formed in 1949, strove for absolute positive returns through
hedging—making contrary bets that would pay off if their main bet
failed. These hedges would at a minimum reduce losses, and in the best
case could produce absolute positive returns (i.e., returns above zero even
if the general market direction was downward). In exchange, these hedges
posed a drag on returns when the market headed upward.
In CAPM terms, a hedge works as follows. (We will retain the XOM
and SPX example from the previous figures.)
A portfolio’s return is the weighted average of the returns of its constituent assets. (Portfolio construction will be treated at length in later
chapters.) So if an investor holds a portfolio that constitutes a long position in XOM for 60 percent of its holdings and in SPY (SPY is a publicly
traded ETF that tracks SPX) for 40 percent, the portfolio’s return would
be calculated as follows:
XOM weight: 60 percent; XOM return: 8 percent

SPY weight: 40 percent; SPY return: 10 percent
Portfolio return: 60% × 8% + 40% × 10% = 4.8% + 4% = 8.8%.
(XOM)
(SPY) 
(Portfolio)
As you would expect, the portfolio’s return falls between that of its two
constituents, shaded toward XOM, which has a larger share of the overall
portfolio.
In CAPM terms, a portfolio’s return is likewise an amalgam of the
returns on each stock within it:
return (portfolio) = weight (XOM) × return (XOM) + weight (SPY) ×
return (SPY), where each stock’s return is as follows:
return (XOM) = beta (XOM) × return (market) + alpha (XOM)
and
return (SPY) = beta (SPY) × return (market) + alpha (SPY)
Note: We assume beta for SPY is 1.0 and that SPY’s alpha is 0 because its
performance is equivalent to the market’s.
Let’s move on now to a hedge example: Assume that the investor has
some reason to believe that Exxon will experience positive developments
and will rise faster than the overall market. A long-only investor would
simply buy XOM. If it performs as expected, the investor will do well;
however, if the market drops substantially, XOM will drop with it and he
will lose money.
To hedge against this possibility—that XOM may decline because
the overall market declines—when a hedge fund buys a long position in
XOM, it can short the SPX. Accordingly, suppose the manager takes a 50
percent positive position in XOM, and a negative 50 percent position in
SPY: The portfolio return is the weighted average of the two positions:
0.5 × [beta (XOM) × return (market) + alpha (XOM)] +
–0.5 × [beta (SPY) × return (market) + alpha (SPY)]
The portfolio weight for SPY has a negative sign because the fund is shorting the SPX. Again note that the alpha for SPY—the market—is by definition 0.
If the investor’s forecast is incorrect and XOM falls (not rises as he
expected), the tumble may be because of a general fall in the market, in

which case his short would make money that would at least partly compensate for his loss in the long XOM position. At the same time, if his
forecast is correct and both XOM and the overall market rise, his XOM
gains will be at least partly offset (dragged down) by his losses on the short
SPX position.
Note that this portfolio (50 percent XOM, –50 percent SPY) is dollar balanced, meaning that there is an equivalent investment on the long
side as on the short side. But the portfolio is not beta balanced. The two
positions do not quite cancel each other out—the portfolio will still be
skewed long or short by the respective alphas and betas of its two positions. In this instance, it’s because XOM’s beta (0.77) is lower than SPY’s
(1.0). If the market goes up the portfolio will only be net long if XOM’s
alpha is sufficiently greater than the market’s to counteract the 0.23 difference in betas (1.0 – 0.77). However, if the betas of the two issues were
very close, the positive return would be 0.5 × the long position’s alpha (in
this case, XOM’s).
Most hedge funds seek beta-balanced portfolios so that they are precisely protected against market-wide moves. That means, essentially
Sum(beta_i * w_i) = 0, and
Sum(|w_i|) = 1.0
where beta_i is the beta for stock I, and w_i is its weight in the portfolio.
In this case, because XOM’s beta is 0.77, we must hold a larger portion
of XOM to offset its lower beta. A beta-balanced portfolio of these two
issues would contain 56 percent XOM, and –44 percent in SPY. (We
leave the algebra as an exercise.)
Such excess returns are quite small, which is why hedge funds need to
trade in very large volumes, and often use leverage (borrowing) to expand
the magnitude of their trades. Many financial institutions like hedge
funds leverage 20 or 30 times their invested capital. Leverage magnifies
both gains and losses. This is why high degrees of leverage are often combined with hedged (long/short) strategies.
