CFA INSTITUTE RESEARCH FOUNDATION / MONOGRAPH

HANDBOOK OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AND BIG DATA APPLICATIONS IN
INVESTMENTS
LARRY CAO, CFA
EDITOR

HANDBOOK OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AND BIG DATA APPLICATIONS IN
INVESTMENTS

LARRY CAO, CFA, EDITOR

Statement of Purpose
The CFA Institute Research Foundation is a not-for-profit organization established to promote the development
and dissemination of relevant research for investment practitioners worldwide.

© 2023 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.
Neither CFA Institute Research Foundation, CFA Institute, nor the publication’s editorial staff is responsible for facts and opinions
presented in this publication. This publication reflects the views of the author(s) and does not represent the official views of
CFA Institute Research Foundation.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopy, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without permission of the copyright holder. Requests
for permission to make copies of any part of the work should be mailed to: Copyright Permissions, CFA Institute, 915 East High
Street, Charlottesville, Virginia 22902. CFA® and Chartered Financial Analyst® are trademarks owned by CFA Institute. To view a
list of CFA Institute trademarks and the Guide for the Use of CFA Institute Marks, please visit our website at www.cfainstitute.org.
CFA Institute does not provide investment, financial, tax, legal, or other advice. This report was prepared for informational purposes only and is not intended to provide, and should not be relied on for, investment, financial, tax, legal, or other advice.
CFA Institute is not responsible for the content of websites and information resources that may be referenced in the report.
Reference to these sites or resources does not constitute an endorsement by CFA Institute of the information contained therein.
The inclusion of company examples does not in any way constitute an endorsement of these organizations by CFA Institute.
Although we have endeavored to ensure that the information contained in this report has been obtained from reliable and up-todate sources, the changing nature of statistics, laws, rules, and regulations may result in delays, omissions, or inaccuracies in
information contained in this report.

Photo credit: yangyang / Moment / Getty Images

ISBN: 978-1-952927-33-1

DEDICATION
In memory of Frank Reilly, CFA, whose unwavering commitment to high-quality research and investment education had a
profound and enduring impact on countless colleagues and students. His contribution to the CFA Institute community will
always be remembered.

BIOGRAPHY
Larry Cao, CFA, is senior director of research at CFA Institute. His research interests include multi-asset strategies and fintech,
such as artificial intelligence (AI), big data, and blockchain. Mr. Cao has led the development of a series of research publications
on fintech and AI in investments, including “FinTech 2017: China, Asia, and Beyond”; “FinTech 2018”; “AI Pioneers in Investment
Management”; and “T-Shaped Teams: Organizing to Adopt AI and Big Data at Investment Firms.” His book Multi-Asset Strategies:
The Future of Investment Management has been translated into Chinese. Mr. Cao is a frequent speaker at industry conferences
on these topics.
During his time pursuing graduate studies at Harvard University and as a visiting scholar at MIT, he co-authored a paper with
Nobel Laureate Franco Modigliani, published in the Journal of Economic Literature. Mr. Cao has over 20 years of investment
industry experience. Previously, he worked at HSBC as a senior manager for the Asia-Pacific region. Mr. Cao began his career
at the People’s Bank of China as a US dollar fixed-income portfolio manager. Later, he worked for Munder Capital Management,
managing US and international equity portfolios, and Morningstar/Ibbotson Associates, managing multi-asset investment
programs for a global institutional clientele.
Mr. Cao has been interviewed by numerous business media outlets, including Bloomberg, CNN, the Financial Times,
the South China Morning Post, and the Wall Street Journal.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

CONTENTS
INTRODUCTORY MATERIAL
Preamble

viii

Margaret Franklin, CFA

Foreword

ix

Aaron Low, PhD, CFA

Notes from the Reviewers

xii

About the Contributors

xiii

Introduction

xiv

Larry Cao, CFA

I. MACHINE LEARNING AND DATA SCIENCE APPLICATIONS IN INVESTMENTS
1.

On Machine Learning Applications in Investments

2

Mike Chen, PhD, and Weili Zhou, CFA (Robeco)

2.

Alternative Data and AI in Investment Research

20

Ingrid Tierens, PhD, CFA, and Dan Duggan, PhD (Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research)

3.

Data Science for Active and Long-Term Fundamental Investing

27

Kai Cui, PhD, and Jonathan Shahrabani (Neuberger Berman)

II. NATURAL LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING, PROCESSING,
AND GENERATION: INVESTMENT APPLICATIONS
4.

Unlocking Insights and Opportunities with NLP in Asset Management

32

Andrew Chin, Yuyu Fan, and Che Guan (AllianceBernstein)

5.

Advances in Natural Language Understanding for Investment Management

56

Stefan Jansen, CFA (Applied AI)

6.

Extracting Text-Based ESG Insights: A Hands-On Guide

70

Tal Sansani, CFA (Off-Script Systems and CultureLine.ai) and Mikhail Samonov, CFA
(Two Centuries Investments and CultureLine.ai)

III. TRADING WITH MACHINE LEARNING AND BIG DATA
7.

Machine Learning and Big Data Trade Execution Support

92

Erin Stanton (Virtu Financial)

8.

Machine Learning for Microstructure Data-Driven Execution Algorithms

100

Peer Nagy, James Powrie, PhD, and Stefan Zohren, PhD (Man Group)

PL Qualified
Activity

This publication qualifies for 4.75 PL credits under the guidelines
of the CFA Institute Professional Learning Program.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

v

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

IV. CHATBOT, KNOWLEDGE GRAPHS, AND AI INFRASTRUCTURE
9.

Intelligent Customer Service in Finance

108

Xu Liang, PhD (Ping An OneConnect)

10.

Accelerated AI and Use Cases in Investment Management

122

Jochen Papenbrock, Doctorate (NVIDIA)

11.

Symbolic AI: A Case Study
Huib Vaessen (APG Asset Management)

vi

CFA Institute Research Foundation

131

HANDBOOK OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AND BIG DATA APPLICATIONS IN
INVESTMENTS

INTRODUCTORY MATERIAL

This book can be found at cfainstitute.org/ai-and-big-data

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

PREAMBLE
At CFA Institute, our mission is to lead the investment
profession globally by promoting the highest standards
of ethics, education, and professional excellence for the
ultimate benefit of society.
In particular, the closing words—“the ultimate benefit
of society”—speak directly to our desire to increase the
positive real-world impact of investment management by
helping to lead the industry forward and staying abreast of
the latest trends, which include leading-edge research into
adoption practices of artificial intelligence (AI) and big data.
While many still see AI and big data as a threat, we at CFA
Institute have consistently advocated “AI + HI (human
intelligence)” as the winning formula for successful financial institutions in the future. Finance professionals bring
an important skill set to the table, and embracing the
advancement of technology and finding ways to work in
harmony with the evolving fintech landscape only lead to
better outcomes for our clients and more efficient ways of
working. Doing so does require a reimagination of corporate
culture and, indeed, the skill sets required among teams to
map to this evolution.
As artificial intelligence and big data become increasingly
integrated into the investment process, we see this as an
opportunity to ensure that those within the industry are well
equipped to evaluate and incorporate these factors properly.
Much of this work remains in early stages throughout
our industry. What makes our research efforts on these

viii

CFA Institute Research Foundation

subjects stand out is our dedication to providing the
investment professionals’ perspectives, which are so
often glossed over in favor of the technical aspects of the
way the technology functions. But we know the hard work
comes when it is time to put these theories into practice.
Early adopters’ combined experiences are particularly valuable for the industry at large in the implementation of new
technology.
Beyond the research we have released to guide the
industry on this journey, we are creating active learning
opportunities for those in the industry who are interested
in mastering the skills required to guide this adoption. Our
recently launched professional learning course in data
science stands as a prime example in action. We also continue to evaluate and evolve the curriculum of our flagship
CFA® Program to take these factors into account.
We extend our deep thanks to our collaborators throughout
the industry who have dedicated time and resources to
this important work, ensuring the practical nature of this
handbook and the integrity of the insights included. It is our
hope that this handbook will equip the industry to adopt
artificial intelligence and big data practices in a meaningful way for the ultimate benefit of their clients. While the
road to adoption can be challenging and complex, it is well
worth the commitment. I hope you will find the same to be
true on your own journey.
Margaret Franklin, CFA
President and CEO, CFA Institute

© 2023 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

FOREWORD
Looking back to the artificial intelligence (AI) work done
during the 1980s and 1990s, the new advances in AI and
machine learning (ML) over the past decade must surely
seem compelling and evolutionary. Breakthroughs in deep
learning methodologies and pedagogies are becoming
mainstream at a rate never seen before in the marketplace.
Many universities have introduced courses in fintech AI
(mostly in the computer science, business finance, and
mathematics departments), and financial professionals
have piled into fintech courses for career development.
And companies are feeding this frenzy with capital and
recruitment, ranging from ML DevOps to data scientists
and scrum teams. While some of the enthusiasm is hype
and hyperbole, new discoveries, some of which are quite
startling, have made real improvements in how we operate
in financial markets.
My first experience in AI was in the early 1990s using ML
algorithms in the high-frequency currency markets. Chaos
bifurcation, fuzzy logic, genetic algorithms, and perceptrons (early versions of the neural nets) were beginning
to become popular in interpreting and trading quotes and
prices as well as headline news counts during the late
1980s and early 1990s. But almost as quickly as these
approaches gained popularity, markets reverted back to
conventional statistical models. There is reason to believe
the current wave is more sustainable than previous ones.
Development and computing costs have decreased, datasets are getting larger and better defined, ML code libraries
have mushroomed, and evolving tech stack architectures
are formed ever so quickly to move from development
to staging to production. While it can sometimes seem
to be a struggle to come to terms with the maze of new
wide-ranging enhancements in such a complex space,
I believe it is helpful to understand the cost–benefit
relationships and how investment and business operating
models can benefit from this frontier.
Let us start with language. Developments in natural language processing (NLP) and deep learning are breaking
boundaries that seemed difficult to breach before. Word
embeddings that can infuse correlation (and thus meanings) across words in vector space have vastly improved
ML’s natural language understanding (NLU) and NLU capabilities, complemented by an impressive corpus of trained
and labeled datasets. This development has allowed the
pervasive use of sentiment analysis in handling the huge
amount of news and social transmissions of views and
opinions. Recent developments of transformer models
(e.g., Google’s LaMDA) are very close to understanding how
we communicate and feel, which perhaps had a big role
in considerably attenuating performance alphas for asset
management. In addition, the introduction of multilayered

architectures in neural networks has provided us a sense
of nonlinear formulation of the data features, which has
helped propagate the advent of deep learning without the
mess of menial feature filtering and wrangling.
But we need to be aware of the challenges to harvesting
good results. Sentiment analysis may work well in developed markets that have a free press. Producing similar outcomes in developing countries with heavy news and social
media censorship and state propaganda may be difficult. It
is not realistic to assume that feature loadings would work
with the same effect (without proper adjustments) in such
diverse cultural and regime settings.
While many of the breakthroughs are impressive, there is
still a long road to reaching (if it was ever possible) the Holy
Grail of investments—namely, our ability to produce accurate market forecasts. In this regard, it is useful to explore
the differences between financial markets and other
disciplines.
First is the importance of the time dimension. Financial
analysis differs from most other sectors in the way that
data obsolescence occurs, both in speed and manner.
This is why we have time-series analysis, a special branch
of statistics, that is almost dedicated to the behavior of
financial data, as well as dataframes in Python pandas that
make it possible to handle the time-dimension property of
price data. Success in forecasting market prices depends
heavily on time and chronological sequence of one asset
vis-à-vis other assets. A consumer planning to purchase
an iPhone will have little need to identify exactly when
the X13 model price of $1,300 was offered. Conversely,
a rational Apple investor would likely have to know the time
at which Apple stock traded at, say, $150. Specifically, the
decay in the information value of asset prices over time
and the conditional information set contained in each asset
price data point render the time stamp (of each piece of
data) an important property of that data tuple.
This fact leads us to the important work done in GRU (gated
recurrent unit), RNN (recurrent neural network), LSTM
(long short-term memory), and attention (transformer’s
encoder-decoder) models—all attempting to link period
memory for each piece of data with some form of time
embedding. Again, we find that the limitations of these
various approaches leave the results wanting. Bayesian
neural networks offer promising advantages on top of the
time-sequence protocol. Possible solutions may borrow
from how human brains are able to extract a distant
memory by similar feature transformations rather than a
hard-coded LSTM that has a limited time memory threshold
or an attention encoder-decoder transformer that suffers

CFA Institute Research Foundation

ix

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

from a missing long-term context. The practical outcome at
this stage would be that these networks would be excellent in trading, market making, and arbitrage applications
but have less success in long-term investment mandates.
For all the tasks attempted with AI in finance, the elephant
in the room must surely be our machine’s ability to forecast
markets. It is as aspirational as it is frustrating. Investment
professionals constantly ask whether markets are efficient,
while computer scientists question whether P = NP. If we
believe that these two questions are related, then perhaps
we may surmise that markets are efficient if and only if
P = NP. The massive growth of exchange-traded funds
(ETFs) versus active funds in developed capital economies
reflects the increasing efficiencies in markets with big,
credible data and computational power. Counterpose this
perspective against the view within the computer science
fraternity that P is not equal to NP (which implies that markets likely are not efficient), and we have potentially contradicting beliefs. And if we give credit to common conjectures
that markets become increasingly inefficient as the time
series lengthens, then the Grossman–Stiglitz (1980)
paradox—that the equilibrium level of market efficiency
is driven by the market costs of skills and technology to
produce alphas—makes a lot of sense.
Although the P = NP conjecture appears theoretical in
nature, it has many implications for the various AI applications and solutions used in capital markets. Deep learning
has rendered many non-forecast-based tasks (e.g., clustering or categorization) in finance to be in the complexity
class P. But stock market prediction problems are still
mostly boxed in the NP class, implying that there is a good
algorithm for checking a given possible solution but that
there is not necessarily a good algorithm for finding solutions. The evolution of AI and ML has given us better ways
of understanding, but not inevitably solving the P versus
NP problem. Although current states of AI can still fail to
find a polynomial-time algorithm in a specified amount of
time, this lens allows us to come closer to understanding
whether markets can ever be truly efficient. And although
it is possible to build an AI algorithm that searches for
poly-time solutions to an NP-hard problem, it may also be
that the world of predictions is of such complexity that no
perfect solution exists. Notwithstanding this possibility, the
practical approach for most stakeholders is to find the best
available ML approach (among the prevailing sets used in
markets) rather than figuring out the perfect solution.
If the current thinking is to improve AI models with new
layers of intelligence embeddings, then it may also be
helpful to evaluate the “efficient frontier” of competing
models in terms of, say, performance versus complexity
(as opposed to returns versus risk). For example, new work
in metalearning seeks to design models that can learn
new skills or adapt to new environments quickly with few
training datasets. How do such dynamic (ever-changing
x

CFA Institute Research Foundation

common sense or comprehensive learning) demands affect
how we train models?
There is no guarantee that the training set’s data-generating process will be the same in the test set in financial
markets. Environments and how the markets perceive new
information are constantly changing in global markets.
Regime changes due to regulations, political economies,
policy frameworks, technology, market participants, information quality, and so on, can materially change feature
impact in nonstationary ways and render training sets less
effective at best and disastrous in worst-case scenarios.
Even within the realm of explainable empirical solutions,
there have been cases that rely too much on nonrepresentative in-sample data to drive investment decisions. The
use of copulas based on stable-period in-sample estimation, which produced overly optimistic ratings of assetbacked securities prior to the Global Financial Crisis (GFC),
is a case in point.
Is the data-generation process (DCP) ergodic or stationary?
A roulette game is very close to ergodic; the distribution
of numbers that have come up in the past is very close to
the probability distribution of numbers on the next spin.
But a game of blackjack when dealt from a set of cards
that are not reshuffled after each hand is much less ergodic. This poses a tricky problem when the training, test,
and actual data come from different DCPs. Price discovery
and risk–return distributions are created from multidisciplinary viewpoints and opinions in a free marketplace, with
varieties of frictions, costs, and regulatory constraints.
This richness in contributing features can create nonstationarity and ergodic issues, making the DCP much more
difficult to calibrate. We can attribute standard volatilities in
prices to noise or lead–lag frictions in price discovery, but
the continued presence of black swan events (fooling the
best of machines and man) tells us that all is not perfect.
Such market characteristics do suggest that current AI
states are still better suited to areas of success enjoyed by
human-operated models or, at least, AI models with close
human supervision. This includes such examples as the
higher rate of success in arbitrage trading strategies over
forecast-driven approaches.
Finally, it is important to augment this discussion with the
ability of AI to produce explainable results. ML projects are
usually not standalone but are part of a corporate strategy.
Naturally, all competing blueprints bubble up to the C-suite
for sponsorship. Unknown risks commonly affiliated with
unexplainable methodology can be construed as recipes
for black swan–type events and derail even the most
promising of programs.
For example, suppose someone offers you two investment
plans. Plan A offers a 10-year success rate of 70% and is a
strategy based on fundamentals that can be readily understood. Plan B is marketed as a strategy that has a 10-year

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

success rate of 80% but is a black box or cannot be easily
understood. Which plan would a typical investor choose?
Most rational investors would likely prefer Plan A to Plan B.
The weakness of statistical models lies in their limited ability to handle large feature sets (dimensions or variables)
compared with ML algorithms. But statistical models possess an advantage that is still unmatched in AI models—
that is, the presence of an underlying theory that is based
on fundamentals and intrinsic valuation drivers. This reinforcement layer of empirical data verification to human
conjectures has always been the hallmark of research. ML
may not necessarily be a black box, but there is a tendency
of users to assume it is.
Although the Financial Stability Board (2017, p. 34) has
indicated that progress in AI shows significant promise,
regulators continue to be concerned that the “lack of
interpretability will make it even more difficult to determine potential effects beyond the firms’ balance sheet,
for example during a systemic shock. Notably, many AI and
machine learning developed models are being ‘trained’ in
a period of low volatility.” Reasons for such caution are
not hard to find. The 1987 Black Monday stock crash was
attributed by many to prevalent option-based program trading at that time. And in the subprime crisis of 2007, there
appears to be evidence that the asymptotic independence
modeling of the Gaussian copula used to price subprime
default likelihood was based on a limited time dataset
(stable cycle) and ignored the conventional wisdom that
credit defaults tend to cluster.
Fortunately, there is an increasing body of work that
attempts to shed light under the AI hood. An example is
how Shapley (1953) values or SHapley Additive exPlanation (SHAP) values for machine learning model features
are providing interesting insights in much the same way

that p-values are used for statistical models. Improving ML
transparency in this way not only improves conviction in
decision making, but it is also helping to build new research
to further our understanding of deep learning.
To conclude, it bears mentioning that the current wave of
AI does not relate only to new methodologies, big data, and
computational power. The additional dimension this time is
the democratization of AI, with the wide involvement of professionals, researchers, educators, and policymakers. The
massive allocation of resources in this field is testimony
to the belief that the benefits are real. However, to make it
sustainable beyond the hype of yet another wave, we need
to take stock of the promise, manage our expectations, and
continue to embrace differing approaches. We are proud to
be part of this effort to support and disseminate the body
of knowledge through this handbook.
Aaron Low, PhD, CFA
Chair, Board of Trustees,
CFA Institute Research Foundation

References
Financial Stability Board. 2017. “Artificial Intelligence
and Machine Learning in Financial Services: Market
Developments and Financial Stability Implications”
(1 November). www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/
P011117.pdf.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980. “On the
Impossibility of Informationally Efficient Markets.” American
Economic Review 70 (3): 393–408.
Shapley, Lloyd S. 1953. “A Value for n-Person Games.”
Contributions to the Theory of Games 2 (28): 307–18.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

xi

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

NOTES FROM THE REVIEWERS
The integration of AI applications into the investment
process is gradually becoming part of modern asset management as AI innovation happens at a rapid pace. I was
delighted to recommend contributors to and review this
handbook, a continuation of the work of CFA Institute in the
area. Over the years, I have had the opportunity to engage
with innovators, subject matter experts, and practitioners
focused on the integration of AI in the investment process and participated in spirited discussions as the risks,
challenges, and realities of applications and, importantly,
adoption, came to light and we moved from an AI revolution
to evolution.
While some think of AI and big data as a threat, there is an
opportunity for AI and human intelligence to evolve together
to drive better investor outcomes. This requires putting
theory and potential use cases into practice. This handbook
provides applications currently used by investment practitioners, who share insights, successes, and challenges.
Designed and curated by Larry Cao, this handbook is an
invaluable reference for investment professionals on the
road to adoption as AI innovation transforms our industry.
Carole K. Crawford, CFA
Managing Director, Americas and Global Events
CFA Institute
We are in an era that is both blessed and cursed by data.
The pace of our accumulating data is extraordinary, and
that makes distilling insights from data harder than ever.
When thinking about the investment process, I emphasize
the integrity and quality of the decision-making process.
However, both are difficult to achieve in real life.
Most of us are trained at school with a generalized foundation of knowledge (broad based but shallow), and
then we step into the real world during a certain period
of time (experience is linked to a certain period). But the
investment industry advocates specialization (depth of
knowledge). Take myself as an example: I am an engineer
by training, and I joined the investment industry just before
the GFC and have been trained as a macro strategist. This
means there is a built-in bias in the way I digest information
(macro, not micro) and respond to the environment (strong
risk aversion). Data science is a perfect tool to help mitigate
these biases. State Super has been incorporating data
science to support our decision-making process in the last
seven years, and the output has been value accretive.

xii

CFA Institute Research Foundation

When I was asked to review this book, I was super excited,
partly because I wholeheartedly believe in the importance
of topics included in this handbook and partly because we
need such a publication in our industry. I hope everyone
enjoys this book and makes it a companion on their data
science journey in the following years.
Charles Wu, CFA
Chief Investment Officer,
State Super SAS Trustee Corporation
President, CFA Society Sydney
It was very gratifying to have been asked to review this
handbook. In my current role, I have had the opportunity to
interact with numerous experts in the field of AI/ML investing and analysis and have gained an informed sense of the
major breakthroughs and the extensive progress that have
been made across the space in recent years. Having said
that, many of the methods described in this handbook are
still in the early stages of development. This seems to me,
however, to be a strength; the reader takes away insights
from practitioners who openly share their experiences in
a dynamically changing environment, where trial and error
remain part of the DNA.
Through engaging and straightforward writing, each
chapter provides perspectives and often state-of-the-art
methodologies on a different aspect of AI/ML in investing.
The content is useful both for professional practitioners
who are already working in the field and for those who are
wishing simply to understand more about how these applications are rapidly changing the landscape of finance and
investment management.
The chapters have been carefully selected and edited
by Larry Cao, who can again be congratulated on pulling
together a wide breadth of pertinent topics and authors
and combining them with great skill.
Susan Spinner, CFA
CEO, CFA Society Germany

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS
Mike Chen, PhD, Robeco
Andrew Chin, AllianceBernstein
Kai Cui, PhD, Neuberger Berman
Dan Duggan, PhD, Goldman Sachs Global Investment
Research
Yuyu Fan, AllianceBernstein
Che Guan, AllianceBernstein
Stefan Jansen, CFA, Applied AI
Peer Nagy, Man Group
Jochen Papenbrock, Doctorate, NVIDIA
James Powrie, PhD, Man Group

Mikhail Samonov, CFA, Two Centuries Investments
and CultureLine.ai
Tal Sansani, CFA, Off-Script Systems and CultureLine.ai
Jonathan Shahrabani, Neuberger Berman
Erin Stanton, Virtu Financial
Ingrid Tierens, PhD, CFA, Goldman Sachs Global Investment
Research
Huib Vaessen, APG Asset Management
Xu Liang, PhD, Ping An OneConnect
Weili Zhou, CFA, Robeco
Stefan Zohren, PhD, Man Group

CFA Institute Research Foundation

xiii

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

INTRODUCTION
Larry Cao, CFA
Senior Director, Research, CFA Institute
Over the last few years, in our interactions with readers
of our artificial intelligence (AI) publications and audiences
for our in-person and virtual presentations around the
world, we have been repeatedly asked how they should
begin their journey of AI adoption. This book is our attempt
at providing initial answers to their questions.

institutions and finance professionals have largely followed
patterns that mirror this five-stage process. Here is a summary of our findings, which culminated in this handbook.
The five stages are awareness, interest, evaluation, trial,
and adoption (see Exhibit 1). It is important to note that
buyers have different needs at each stage. For example,
at the awareness stage, they lack information about the
new product, which they seek at the interest stage. At the
evaluation stage, buyers look for more specific proof that
the new product makes sense, and if so, they will move to
the next step, trial, where they experiment with the new
product. If all goes well, they will finally reach the adoption
stage and start using the new product regularly.

Who Should Read
This Handbook?
We have produced this handbook with the following target
audience and objectives in mind:
•

Help C-suite executives and board members with
responsibility to develop and execute their firms’ AI
and big data strategies to get an overview of the
subject and set strategic directions.

Awareness

•

Help knowledge engineers leading AI and big data projects at investment firms and their teams select projects.

•

Help investment and technology professionals who
work on T-shaped teams understand project backgrounds and implementation details.

•

Help regulators stay abreast of industry developments
so as to facilitate their policy development efforts.

•

Help students (and the professors who are teaching
them) prepare for a career on future investment teams
or at regulatory agencies.

From 2015 to 2017, AlphaGo went from beating a human
professional player at the board game Go for the first time
to beating the best human Go player. The historic events
brought artificial intelligence from computer labs into the
public domain, quickly becoming the subject of conversation at dinner tables, at cocktail parties, and in board rooms.
Up to that point, main street and the mainstream financial
services industry had focused their attention on what we
later referred to as “early-stage fintech”—that is, peer-topeer lending, mobile payments, and robo-advice. Our investigation led us to refute that these new businesses were
disrupting the financial services industry, simply because
they prospered where customers were un(der)-banked and
fared less well where financial services were entrenched.

In short, if you are embarking on the journey of AI and big
data adoption in finance, this book is written for you.

The AI Adoption Journey
in Finance and You
There is a well-known five-stage model of the buyers’ decision process for new products (Kotler and Armstrong 1998).
As we studied the benefits, hurdles, and ways to overcome
these challenges of AI adoption over the last few years, we
came to realize that the AI adoption journeys of financial

I also wrote in the financial press in 2016 that we believed
winners would follow the model “Fin + Tech” (Cao 2016)—
that is, collaboration between powerful financial institutions and powerful tech companies. The winner-takes-all
model commonly seen in the internet business will not
extend quite as easily to finance.
The first publication in our series, “FinTech 2017: China, Asia,
and Beyond” (CFA Institute 2017), included a contributor’s

Exhibit 1. The Five Stages of the Buyers’ Decision Process for New Products
Awareness
• Lack info

xiv

Interest
• Seek info

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Evaluation
• Seek proof

Trial
• Experiment

Adoption
• Use regularly

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

article highlighting that the ABCs of fintech (artificial intelligence, big data, and cloud computing) will be the driving force
for change in the financial services industry. Our audience’s
reception, however, was lukewarm in the spring of 2017.

Interest
Google Trends showed that worldwide searches for “artificial intelligence” continuously rose for several years
through 2018. This finding is consistent with our experience. We received more media requests on AI and were
quoted in an Ignites article in the summer of 2017 on
our positive views regarding the collaboration between
Microsoft and China Asset Management, one of the top
mutual fund firms in China.
Six months later, we invited Tang Xiaodong,1 CEO of China
Asset Management; Eric Chang, vice president of Microsoft
Research Institute Asia; and senior executives from other
sectors in finance to speak at the AI and the Future of
Financial Services Forum, a major event we organized in
Beijing, which was also livestreamed to satellite venues
in several other financial centers in the region. It attracted
a record number of participants across the region—either
joining in person in Beijing or at one of the satellite venues.
In his fascinating presentation on machine learning (ML)
and neural networks, Chang highlighted what Microsoft
believed was going to be the winning formula of AI adoption: “AI + HI (human intelligence),” which we readily
adopted because we considered it an extension of our
“Fin + Tech” philosophy in the age of AI.
Tang gave an informative talk on AI’s applications in asset
management. Other speakers rounded out the forum
with insights from their unique vantage points. The event
received the highest ratings from participants, reflecting both the audience’s passion for the subject and their
satisfaction with our expert speakers.
My articles on the subject, from the concepts of AI,
machine learning, and deep learning (Cao 2018a) to their
applications in finance (Cao 2018b), published, respectively, in February and March 2018 on the Enterprising
Investor blog were similarly popular with readers, such that
the former became the blog’s top ranked article of February
2018 (McCaffrey 2018a); these two articles also ranked
among the top 10, for the year (McCaffrey 2018b). These
articles and more from our contributors formed the core
of our “FinTech 2018” report (CFA Institute 2018).

Evaluation
In late 2018, I was invited to speak at two closed-door
events, one attended by technology executives at global
financial institutions and the other with researchers from
leading central banks and universities around the world. My
fellow speakers at both events shared one frustration: They
were having a hard time distilling insights from big data!
The participant demographic at both events was certainly
representative of the leaders in their respective domains,
which seemed to me a clear sign that AI adoption in financial services had reached what Gartner refers to as “the
trough of disillusionment” in the Hype Cycle model,2 where
“interest wanes as experiments and implementations fail
to deliver.” In the simpler terms of the five-stage model, our
audience reached the evaluation stage and needed proof
that AI works before they could move forward.
We believed the best way to provide that proof would be a
collection of case studies from successful early adopters
who had put AI and big data to productive use in finance.
To help readers relate, we selected cases based on two
criteria: geography—Americas; Asia Pacific (APAC); and
Europe, Middle East, and Africa (EMEA)—and line of work—
stocks, bonds, asset allocation, and hedge funds. These
elements formed the basic construct of the “AI Pioneers in
Investment Management” report (CFA Institute 2019).
We tested the idea while speaking at the forum of the CFA
Institute Annual Conference in 2019,3 and judging from the
audience’s reaction and questions, they were clearly looking for concrete examples, exactly the type that we were
working on, rather than a continuation of the more generic
type of information we provided in 2018.
A CFA Institute Practice Analysis survey conducted in the
spring of 2019 showed that adoption rates for AI and big
data techniques in the industry remained low (CFA Institute
2019, pp. 8–13). We shared our perspectives in the report
on the challenges the industry faced and provided our
recommendation. The report was cited in the Financial
Times and the Harvard Business Review and by Reuters and
researchers at Deloitte and Morningstar, among others.

Trial
The day after the report was published, I spoke at an industry conference in Toronto.4 And then I went to Singapore,
before going on to speak at more than a dozen financial

1

He left China Asset Management in 2019 and now leads BlackRock’s China efforts (BlackRock 2019).

2

See the “Gartner Hype Cycle” webpage at www.gartner.com/en/research/methodologies/gartner-hype-cycle.

See my comments in the video “AI and Big Data in the Future of Investment Management” at https://cfainstitute.gallery.video/annual19/detail/
video/6036457979001/ai-and-big-data-in-the-future-of-investment-management.
3

4

Toronto, and broadly Canada, is of course also where this latest wave of AI development started.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

xv

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

centers in APAC and EMEA, providing us with many
additional touch points with the industry and finance
professionals to get a read on their needs.
The feedback we got from our readers and audiences was
overwhelmingly consistent with the model prediction: They
wanted to experiment with AI and big data and asked for
help on where to begin.5 Of course, every firm and every
professional are unique. Providing a one-size-fits-all answer
is not only challenging but also likely to be counterproductive. That said, we believe we can provide a framework,
based on our own analysis and field research into cases
that were successful and, even more importantly, those
that were less fortunate.
The first step in the framework is building an AI-enabling
organization, or T-shaped teams. We developed the concept of a T-shaped team specifically to highlight the need
for communication and strategic leadership in the context
of AI adoption in financial services (CFA Institute 2021). A
T-shaped team comprises three distinct functions: the traditional investment function, a technology (data science) function, and an innovation function. The background and training
of finance and data science professionals are so different
that it makes knowledge engineers in the innovation function
who can provide both communication support and strategic
leadership especially important for AI adoption to succeed.
The second step in the framework is to implement the AI
strategy developed by the leadership. For this step, we
believed it would be most helpful to provide both executives at financial institutions looking to embark on the

AI adoption journey and professionals at these institutions
a menu of options they could pick and choose from that
would be most appropriate for their strategy, product
lineup, and staff’s level of expertise in and acceptance
of AI adoption. This is where this handbook comes in.
There is a plethora of books published about machine
learning for investment and finance. Yet they tend to be
written for quants or programmers with prior machine
learning knowledge and focus on the technical aspects of
implementation. The attention tends to be 80/20 between
technology and finance.
This handbook is different. We strive to provide a reference
book on AI and big data applications in investments written
from the finance industry perspective and offer details on
solutions that are in production and effectively field-tested
every day.6
Consistent with this objective, we have encouraged contributors to include snippets of coding where they deem
appropriate. We hope the more tech-savvy readers among
us will find it helpful, and that the rest of us will be motivated to catch up over time.
We have summarized from our vantage point the industry’s progress on the AI adoption journey and our efforts to
support it (see Exhibit 2). What is next? The most natural
scenario is that we will support the next stage of the adoption journey in much the same way as we do in other, more
established areas of investment. Do let us know what you
think and how we can best be of service.

Exhibit 2. The Five Stages of AI Adoption and Accompanying Research
Awareness
• Lack info

Interest
• Seek info

Evaluation
• Seek proof

Trial
• Experiment

Adoption
• Use regularly

(future editions)

5

Another popular area of interest that emerged at the time was AI ethics. For additional details, see CFA Institute (2022).

Many may consider “field-tested” an aspirational goal in AI and big data applications today, probably rightly so. Our operating definition of the
term is that the type of solution is in production at different firms in the process of managing significant sums of money.
6

xvi

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

How Is the Handbook
Organized?
In line with our understanding of the active areas of AI
and big data adoption in investments (and, more broadly,
finance), we have organized the handbook along four
streams, each with a few chapters written by practitioners
who are active in that area. Representative of the ecosystem, most of our contributors hail from investment firms,
with the remaining coming from investment banks, other
financial institutions, and service vendors.
Part I provides an overview of the current state of AI and big
data adoption in investments. In Chapter 1, Mike Chen and Weili
Zhou share their perspectives on challenges and potential
pitfalls in applying ML in finance and provide an overview of the
broad areas of applications. In Chapter 2, Ingrid Tierens and Dan
Duggan discuss their experiences and takeaways in working
with alternative data, in addition to some use cases. Chapter
3, by Kai Cui and Jonathan Shahrabani, reviews how data
science can inform long-term investment decisions of active
fundamental investors.
Part II covers natural language understanding, processing,
and generation. Natural language processing (NLP) is a
branch of AI studies that dates to the 1950s, although the
latest boom is often attributed to the introduction of ML
into the field since the 1980s. Its applications in investments also go back well over a decade (see, e.g., Antweiler
and Frank 2004), although significant strides have been
made since then, which our contributors for Chapters 4–6
focus on.
In Chapter 4, Andrew Chin, Yuyu Fan, and Che Guan provide
an overview of the broad applications of natural language
processing in investments today, ranging from well-known
areas, such as sentiment analysis and earnings transcript
analysis, to more recent applications using corporate filings
in compliance and, in sales, to gain client insights from public
information. In Chapter 5, Stefan Jansen discusses from
a technical perspective the evolution of natural language
understanding and trends in its applications. Chapter 6, by
Tal Sansani and Mikhail Samonov rounds out this stream with
an aspirational discussion on applying NLP in environmental,
social, and governance analysis.
Part III covers trading. This is an active area of AI and big
data activities, although the percentage of trades executed
with AI and big data techniques remains small. Our contributors from different parts of the ecosystem shared their
perspectives. Chapter 7, by Erin Stanton, highlights a few
use cases at various stages of the trading process that, in
aggregate, help readers piece together a picture of ML and
big data application in the trading landscape. In Chapter 8,
Peer Nagy, James Powrie, and Stefan Zohren of Man Group

zoom in on limit order books as the microstructure data
source and explain in detail how ML models can help predict spreads, trade volume, volatility, and more to inform
trading decisions.
In addition to the areas mentioned thus far, there are obviously still many more AI and big data applications that are
being developed and applied in investments and finance.
Part IV addresses development in three of these areas.
Customer service (call centers) is one of the most triedand-true applications for AI that has been widely applied
across industries. In Chapter 9, Xu Liang of Ping An
OneConnect offers an overview of financial institutions’
use of AI in customer service, providing many enlightening
business applications and discussing the underlying technology, such as voice, NLP, and knowledge graphs.
The current AI boom is largely driven by progress in three
areas—algorithms, big data, and computing power—where
computing power’s contribution is often understated. In
Chapter 10, Jochen Papenbrock of NVIDIA argues, supported by a number of recent cases in investments, that
there is increasingly a need for accelerated computing.
AI is a fluid term. The scope of our AI and big data efforts,
including this handbook, focuses on machine learning
(and its various branches)—NLP, computer vision, and
unstructured data. Symbolic AI is a branch of AI research
that was popular before the latest AI boom, brought on by
nonsymbolic AI studies, such as machine learning. In the
last chapter of this handbook, Huib Vaessen shares how
an automated real estate portfolio management solution
based on symbolic AI can help an investment team.
The results of a CFA Institute global survey conducted
when this handbook was completed support our positioning and topic selection (see Exhibit 3). To the question of
which talents will be in most demand, 35% of respondents
answered finance/investment talents with some AI and big
data training and 32% answered both finance/investment
and AI/big data skills. This handbook has indeed been written to help finance/investment professionals move into
those two buckets.
The picture is similar in terms of topic selection. For example, 56% of the respondents are using AI and big data in
data analysis, a topic that we hope this handbook has
thoroughly covered throughout, and about a quarter of the
respondents are using AI and big data techniques in areas
outside the core investment business, such as sales and
marketing or customer service, which are also well covered
in the handbook. Chapter 9 focuses entirely on customer
service. Chapter 4 covers applications in sales and marketing in addition to investment applications, which is partly
why we allocated more space to the chapter.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

xvii

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 3. Responses to CFA Institute Global Survey Questions
A. Over the next two years, which type of talents is your organization primarily looking to hire more? (select up to two)
AI and big data talents with no finance skills
AI and big data talents with some finance skills
Talents with both finance and AI and big data skills
Finance talents with some AI and big data skills
Finance talents with no AI and big data skills
0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

35%

40%

B. What business activities has your organization been routinely applying AI and big data to? (select all that apply)
Compliance
Streamlining other mid-/back-office operations
Customer service
Decision making in our core business
Cybersecurity
Sales and marketing
Risk management
Data analysis in our core business
0%

As we continue our research efforts in AI and big data applications, please feel free to drop us a note and share with
us your successes or needs. We will strive to serve as your
knowledge engineers, building bridges between thought
leaders and practitioners.

Acknowledgments
Putting together such a handbook of unique positioning for
the first time was not an easy task. My gratitude goes to all
who have supported our efforts.
First, I have been fortunate to work with some of the key
industry practitioners putting AI and big data to work in
investments and finance. Despite the tremendous demand
on their time, they have all given the project much attention, often patiently working with us through multiple iterations to make sure that the chapters collectively form a
coherent chorus.
My deep appreciation also goes to Aaron Low, CFA, Carole
Crawford, CFA, Charles Wu, CFA, and Susan Spinner, CFA, for
reading through the handbook with me from its infancy in

xviii

CFA Institute Research Foundation

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

the spring of 2022 through the final draft in the fall. Their
expertise, judgment, and network have gone a long way in
raising the bar for this project.
Finally, credit goes to the leadership and the project team
at CFA Institute. Without their steadfast support, this
handbook would have never been able to get to where
it is today.

References
Antweiler, W., and M. Z. Frank. 2004. “Is All That Talk Just
Noise? The Information Content of Internet Stock Message
Boards.” Journal of Finance 59: 1259–94.
Bartram, Söhnke M., Jürgen Branke, and
Mehrshad Motahari. 2020. “Artificial Intelligence
in Asset Management.” Literature review, CFA
Institute Research Foundation (28 August).
www.cfainstitute.org/research/foundation/2020/
rflr-artificial-intelligence-in-asset-management.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

BlackRock. 2019. “BlackRock Appoints Tony Tang Head of
China” (17 April). www.blackrock.com/corporate/newsroom/
press-releases/article/corporate-one/press-releases/
blackrock-appoints-tony-tang-head-of-china.
Cao, Larry. 2016. “FinTech and the Future of Financial
Services.” Hong Kong Economic Journal (26 May).
http://startupbeat.hkej.com/?p=29681.
Cao, Larry. 2018a. “Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning,
and Deep Learning: A Primer.” Enterprising Investor (blog;
13 February). https://blogs.cfainstitute.org/investor/
2018/02/13/artificial-intelligence-machine-learningand-deep-learning-in-investment-managementa-primer/.
Cao, Larry. 2018b. “Portfolio Managers, Artificial Intelligence
Is Coming for Your Jobs.” Enterprising Investor (blog;
9 March). https://blogs.cfainstitute.org/investor/2018/03/
09/portfolio-managers-artificial-intelligence-is-comingfor-your-jobs/.
CFA Institute. 2019. “AI Pioneers in Investment
Management.” www.cfainstitute.org/-/media/documents/
survey/AI-Pioneers-in-Investment-Management.pdf.
CFA Institute. 2022. “Ethics and Artificial Intelligence in
Investment Management: A Framework for Investment
Professionals.” www.cfainstitute.org/-/media/documents/
article/industry-research/Ethics-and-Artificial-Intelligencein-Investment-Management_Online.pdf.

CFA Institute. 2017. “FinTech 2017: China, Asia, and Beyond”
(May). https://hub.ipe.com/download?ac=72587.
CFA Institute. 2018. “FinTech 2018: The Asia Pacific Edition”
(September). www.cfainstitute.org/-/media/documents/
book/industry-research/fintech-booklet.pdf.
CFA Institute. 2021. “T-Shaped Teams: Organizing to Adopt
AI and Big Data at Investment Firms.” www.cfainstitute.
org/-/media/documents/article/industry-research/
t-shaped-teams.pdf.
Kotler, Philip, and Gary Armstrong. 1998. Principles of
Marketing. Hoboken, NJ: Prentice Hall.
McCaffrey, Paul. 2018a. “Top Five Articles from February:
Body Language, Data Science, Artificial Intelligence.”
Enterprising Investor (blog; 28 February). https://blogs.
cfainstitute.org/investor/2018/02/28/top-five-articles-from-february-body-language-data-science-artificial-intelligence/.
McCaffrey, Paul. 2018b. “Top 10 Posts from 2018: Chart
Crimes, Political Divides, AI, and the Skill Ratio.” Enterprising
Investor (blog; 27 December). https://blogs.cfainstitute.
org/investor/2018/12/27/top-10-posts-from-2018-chartcrimes-political-divides-ai-and-the-skill-ratio/.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

xix

HANDBOOK OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AND BIG DATA APPLICATIONS IN
INVESTMENTS

I. MACHINE LEARNING AND DATA SCIENCE
APPLICATIONS IN INVESTMENTS

This book can be found at cfainstitute.org/ai-and-big-data

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

1. ON MACHINE LEARNING APPLICATIONS
IN INVESTMENTS
Mike Chen, PhD
Head, Alternative Alpha Research, Robeco

Weili Zhou, CFA
Head, Quant Equity Research, Robeco

Introduction
In recent years, machine learning (ML) has been a popular
technique in various domains, ranging from streaming video
and online shopping recommendations to image detection
and generation to autonomous driving. The attraction and
desire to apply machine learning in finance are no different.
•

•

“The global AI fintech market is predicted to grow at a
CAGR of 25.3% between 2022 and 2027” (Columbus
2020).
“A survey of IT executives in banking finds that 85%
have a ‘clear strategy’ for adopting AI in developing
new products and services” (Nadeem 2018).

Putting aside the common and widespread confusion
between artificial intelligence (AI) and ML (see, e.g., Cao
2018; Nadeem 2018), the growth of ML in finance is projected to be much faster than that of the overall industry
itself, as the previous quotes suggest. Faced with this
outlook, practitioners may want answers to the following
questions:
•

What does ML bring to the table compared with traditional techniques?

•

How do I make ML for finance work? Are there special
considerations? What are some common pitfalls?

•

What are some examples of ML applied to finance?

In this chapter, we explore how ML can be applied from
a practitioner’s perspective and attempt to answer many
common questions, including the ones above.1
The first section of the chapter discusses practitioners’ motivations for using ML, common challenges in

implementing ML for finance, and solutions. The second
section discusses several concrete examples of ML applications in finance and, in particular, equity investments.

Motivations, Challenges,
and Solutions in Applying ML
in Investments
In this section, we discuss reasons for applying ML, the
unique challenges involved, and how to avoid common
pitfalls in the process.

Motivations
The primary attraction of applying ML to equity investing, as
with almost all investment-related endeavors, is the promise
of higher risk-adjusted return. The hypothesis is that these
techniques, explicitly designed for prediction tasks based on
high-dimensional data and without any functional form specification, should excel at predicting future equity returns.
Emerging academic literature and collective practitioner
experience support this hypothesis. In recent years, practitioners have successfully applied ML algorithms to predict
equity returns, and ML-based return prediction algorithms
have been making their way into quantitative investment
models. These algorithms have been used worldwide in
both developed and emerging markets, for large-cap and
small-cap investment universes, and with single-country
or multi-country strategies.2 In general, practitioners have
found that ML-derived alpha models outperform those
generated from more traditional linear models3 in predicting
cross-sectional equity returns.

Readers interested in the theoretical underpinnings of ML algorithms, such as random forest or neural networks, should read Hastie, Tibshirani,
and Friedman (2009) and Goodfellow, Bengio, and Courville (2016).
1

There are also numerous academic studies on using ML to predict returns. For example, ML techniques have been applied in a single-country
setting by Gu, Kelly, and Xiu (2020) to the United States, by Abe and Nakayama (2018) to Japan, and by Leippold, Wang, and Zhou (2022) to
China’s A-share markets. Similarly, in a multi-country/regional setting, ML has been applied by Tobek and Hronec (2021) and Leung, Lohre,
Mischlich, Shea, and Stroh (2021) to developed markets and by Hanauer and Kalsbach (2022) to emerging markets.
2

3

For linear equity models, see, for example, Grinold and Kahn (1999).

2

CFA Institute Research Foundation

© 2023 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

In addition to predicting equity returns, ML has been
used to predict intermediate metrics known to predict
future returns. For example, practitioners have used ML to
forecast corporate earnings and have found ML-derived
forecasts to be significantly more accurate and informative than other commonly used earnings prediction
models.4 Another use of ML in equity investing developed
by Robeco’s quantitative researchers has been to predict
not the entire investment universe’s return but the returns
of those equities that are likely to suffer a severe price drop
in the near future. Investment teams at Robeco have found
that ML techniques generate superior crash predictions
compared with those from linear models using traditional
metrics, such as leverage ratio or distance to default.5
What drives the outperformance of ML over other known
quantitative techniques? The main conclusion from practitioners and academics is that because ML algorithms
do not prespecify the functional relationship between the
prediction variables (equity return, future earnings, etc.)
and the predictors (metrics from financial statements, past
returns, etc.), ML algorithms are not constrained to a linear
format as is typical of other techniques but, rather, can
uncover interaction and nonlinear relationships between
the input features and the output variable(s).

Interaction and nonlinear effects
The interaction effect occurs when the prediction outputs
cannot be expressed as a linear combination of the individual inputs because the effect of one input depends on the
value of the other ones. Consider a stylistic example of predicting equity price based on two input features: reported
earnings and an accounting red flag, where the red-flag
input is binary: 0 (no cause of concern) and 1 (grave concern). The resulting ML output with these two inputs may
be that when the red-flag input is 0, the output is linearly
and positively related to reported earnings; in contrast,
when the red-flag input is 1, the output is a 50% decrease
in price regardless of the reported earnings. Exhibit 1
illustrates this stylistic example.
ML prediction can also outperform the traditional linear
model prediction due to nonlinear effects. There are many
empirically observed nonlinear effects that linear models
cannot model. For example, there is a nonlinear relationship between a firm’s credit default swap (CDS) spread
and its equity returns because equity can be framed as an
embedded call option on a firm’s assets, thereby introducing nonlinearity.6 Exhibit 2 illustrates this example. Many
ML algorithms, particularly neural networks,7 explicitly

Exhibit 1. Illustration of the Interaction Effect between Accounting Red Flags
and Equity Returns
Return

Accounting Red Flag = 0

Reported Earnings

Accounting Red Flag = 1

Source: Robeco.

4

This conclusion was replicated and supported also by academics. For example, see Cao and You (2021).

5

For more information on using ML for crash prediction, see Swinkels and Hoogteijling (2022).

6

For more details, see Birge and Zhang (2018).

Neural networks incorporate nonlinearity through activation functions in each neuron. Without activation functions, neural networks, regardless
of their depth, reduce down to traditional linear models commonly used in finance. For more on activation functions, see Goodfellow et al. (2016).
7

CFA Institute Research Foundation

3

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 2. Illustration of the Nonlinear Relationship between a CDS
and Equity Returns
Return

CDS Spread

Source: Robeco.

introduce nonlinearity into the model setup, facilitating
nonlinearity modeling.

Another term being used, perhaps with a more positive
connotation, is “knowledge discovery.”

Empirically, academics and practitioners have found that
the interaction effect accounts for a large portion of ML
techniques’ outperformance, while the jury is still out on
whether nonlinear effects contribute positively to the outperformance. A well-known study in the field by Gu, Kelly,
and Xiu (2020, p. 2258) found that “the favorable performance of [ML algorithms] indicates a benefit to allowing for
potentially complex interactions among predictors.” In the
study, comparing the performance of purely linear models
with that of generalized linear models, the authors note that
“the generalized linear model … fails to improve on the performance of purely linear methods (R2OOS of 0.19%). The fact
that this method uses spline functions of individual features,
but includes no interaction among features, suggests that
univariate expansions provide little incremental information
beyond the [purely] linear model” (Gu et al. 2020, p. 2251).
However, other studies have found that both interaction and
nonlinear effects contribute positively to ML models’ outperformance (see, e.g., Abe and Nakayama 2018; Swinkels and
Hoogteijling 2022; Choi, Jiang, and Zhang 2022).

With the ongoing information and computing revolution and
the increased popularity of quantitative finance, the amount
of financial data is growing at a rapid pace. This increased
amount of data may or may not embody relevant information for investment purposes. Since many of the data types
and sources are new, many investors do not have a strong
prior opinion on whether and how they can be useful. Thus,
ML algorithms that are designed to look for relationships
have become attractive for practitioners and academics in
the hope that, even without specifying a hypothesis on the
economic relationship, the ML algorithm will figure out the
link between inputs and outputs. Although ML algorithms
have built-in mechanisms to combat overfitting or discovering spurious correlations between input features and output
predictions,8 caution must still be taken to avoid discovering
nonrepeatable and nonreplicable relationships and patterns.
Later in this chapter, we will address this issue further and
consider other challenges practitioners face when implementing ML in live portfolios. But first, we will discuss what
makes the financial market different from other domains in
which ML has shown tremendous success.

Find relationships from the data deluge
Another attraction of applying ML to financial markets is
the promise of having the algorithm discover relationships not specified or perhaps not known by academics
and practitioners—that is, data mining, which historically
has been a pejorative in quantitative finance circles.

Unique Challenges of Applying ML
in Finance
When applying ML for investments, great care must be
taken because financial markets differ from domains where

Examples include k-fold cross-validation, dropout, and regularization. For deeper discussions, see Hastie et al. (2009) and Goodfellow et al.
(2016).
4
CFA Institute Research Foundation
8

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

ML has made tremendous strides. These differences can
mitigate many of the specific advantages ML algorithms
enjoy, making them less effective in practice when applied
in real-life situations. A few of these differences follow.

Signal-to-noise ratio and system
complexity
Financial data have a low signal-to-noise ratio. For a given
security, any one metric is generally not a huge determinant
of how that security will perform. For example, suppose
Company XYZ announced great earnings this quarter. Its
price can still go down after the announcement because
earnings were below expectations, because central banks
are hiking interest rates, or because investors are generally
long the security and are looking to reduce their positions.
Compare this situation with a high signal-to-noise domain—
for example, streaming video recommendation systems.
If a person watches many movies in a specific genre,
chances are high that the person will also like other movies
in that same genre. Because financial returns compress
high-dimensional information and drivers (company-specific,
macro, behavioral, market positioning, etc.) into one dimension, positive or negative, the signal-to-noise ratio of any
particular information item is generally low.
It is fair to say that the financial market is one of the most
complex man-made systems in the world. And this complexity and low signal-to-noise ratio can cause issues
when ML algorithms are not applied skillfully. Although ML
algorithms are adept at detecting complex relationships,
the complexity of the financial market and the low signalto-noise ratio that characterizes it can still pose a problem
because they make the true relationship between drivers of
security return and the outcome difficult to detect.

Small vs. big data
Another major challenge in applying ML in financial markets
is the amount of available data. The amount of financial data
is still relatively small compared with many domains in which
ML has thrived, such as the consumer internet domain or
the physical sciences. The data that quantitative investors
traditionally have used are typically quarterly or monthly.
And even for the United States, the market with the longest
available reliable data, going back 100 years, the number of
monthly data points for any security we might wish to consider is at most 1,200. Compared with other domains where
the amount of data is in the billions and trillions, the quantity
of financial data is minuscule. To be fair, some of the newer
data sources, or “alternative data,” such as social media
posts or news articles, are much more abundant than traditional financial data. However, overall, the amount of financial
data is still small compared with other domains.

The small amount of financial data is a challenge to ML
applications because a significant driver of an ML algorithm’s power is the amount of available data (see Halevy,
Norvig, and Pereira 2009). Between a simple ML algorithm
trained on a large set of data versus a sophisticated ML
algorithm trained on a relatively smaller set of data, the
simpler algorithm often outperforms in real-life testing. With
a large set of data, investors applying ML can perform true
cross-validation and out-of-sample testing to minimize
overfitting by dividing input data into different segments.
The investor can conduct proper hyperparameter tuning
and robustness checks only if the amount of data is large
enough. The small amount of financial data adds to the
challenges of applying ML to financial markets mentioned
earlier—the financial markets’ high system complexity and
low signal-to-noise ratio.

Stationarity vs. adaptive market,
irrationality
Finally, what makes financial markets challenging for ML
application in general is that markets are nonstationary.
What we mean is that financial markets adapt and change
over time. Many other domains where ML algorithms have
shined are static systems. For example, the rules governing protein unfolding are likely to stay constant regardless
of whether researchers understand them. In contrast,
because of the promised rewards, financial markets “learn”
as investors learn what works over time and change their
behavior, thereby changing the behavior of the overall
market. Furthermore, because academics have been successful over the last few decades in discovering and publishing drivers of market returns—for example, Fama and
French (1993)—their research also increased knowledge of
all market participants and such research changes market
behavior, as noted by McLean and Pontiff (2016).
The adaptive nature of financial markets means not only
that ML algorithms trained for investment do not have a
long enough history with which to train the model and a
low signal-to-noise ratio to contend with but also that the
rules and dynamics that govern the outcome the models
try to predict also change over time. Luckily, many ML algorithms are adaptive or can be designed to adapt to evolving
systems. Still, the changing system calls into question
the validity and applicability of historical data that can be
used to train the algorithms—data series that were not
long enough to begin with. To further complicate the issue,
financial markets are man-made systems. Their results
are the collective of individual human actions, and human
beings often behave irrationally—for example, making decisions based on greed or fear.9 This irrationality characteristic does not exist in many of the other domains in which ML
has succeeded.

There have been various studies on how greed and fear affect market participants’ decision-making process. See, for example, Lo, Repin, and
Steenbarger (2005).
9

CFA Institute Research Foundation

5

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

How to Avoid Common Pitfalls When
Applying ML in Finance
This section addresses some potential pitfalls when applying ML to financial investment.10

Overfitting
Because of the short sample data history, overfitting is
a significant concern when applying ML techniques in
finance. This concern is even stronger than when applying
traditional quantitative techniques, such as linear regression, because of the high degrees of freedom inherent in
ML algorithms. The result of overfitting is that one may get
a fantastic backtest, but out-of-sample, the results will not
live up to expectations.
There are some common techniques used in ML
across all domains to combat overfitting. They include
cross-validation, feature selection and removal, regularization, early stopping, ensembling, and having holdout data.11
Because of the lower sample data availability in finance,
some of these standard techniques might not be applicable or work as well in the financial domain as in others.
However, there are also advantages to working in the
financial domain. The most significant advantage is human
intuition and economic domain knowledge. What we mean
by this is that investors and researchers applying machine
learning can conduct “smell tests” to see whether the relationships found by ML algorithms between input features
and output predictions make intuitive or economic sense.
For example, to examine the relationship between inputs
and outputs, one can look at Shapley additive explanation
(SHAP) value, introduced by Lundberg and Lee (2017). SHAP
value is computed from the average of the marginal contribution of the feature when predicting the targets, where
the marginal contribution is computed by comparing the
performance after withholding that variable from the feature set versus the feature set that includes the variable.
Exhibit 3 plots SHAP values from Robeco’s work on using
ML to predict equity crashes,12 where various input features
are used to predict the probability of financial distress of
various stocks in the investment universe. The color of
each dot indicates the sign and magnitude of a feature,
where red signals a high feature value and blue denotes a
low feature value. Take Feature 25, for example. As the feature value increases (as indicated by the color red), the ML
algorithm predicts a higher probability of financial distress.

And as the feature value decreases (as indicated by the
color blue), the ML algorithm predicts a lower probability of
financial distress. With this information, experienced investors can apply their domain knowledge to see whether the
relationship discovered by the ML algorithm makes sense.
For example, if Feature 25, in this case, is the leverage ratio
and Feature 1 is distance to default,13 then the relationship may make sense. However, if the features are flipped
(Feature 25 is distance to default and Feature 1 is the
leverage ratio), then it is likely that the ML algorithm made a
mistake, possibly through overfitting.
Another approach to mitigate overfitting and having ML
algorithms find spurious correlations is to try to eliminate
it from the start. Ex post explanation via SHAP values and
other techniques is useful, but investors can also apply
their investment domain knowledge to curate the input set
to select those inputs likely to have a relationship with the
prediction objective. This is called “feature engineering” in
ML lingo and requires financial domain knowledge. As an
example, when we are trying to predict stock crash probability, fundamental financial metrics such as profit margin
and debt coverage ratio are sensible input features for the
ML algorithm, but the first letter of the last name of the CEO,
for example, is likely not a sensible input feature.

Replicability
There is a debate about whether there is a replicability
crisis in financial research.14 The concerns about replicability are especially relevant to results derived from applying
ML because, in addition to the usual reasons for replicability difficulties (differences in universe tested, p-hacking,
etc.), replicating ML-derived results also faces the following
challenges:
•

The number of tunable variables in ML algorithms is
even larger than in the more traditional statistical
techniques.

•

ML algorithms are readily available online. Investors
can often download open-sourced algorithms from
the internet without knowing the algorithm’s specific
version used in the original result, random seed, and
so on. In addition, if one is not careful, different implementations of the same algorithm can have subtle
differences that result in different outcomes.

To avoid replicability challenges, we suggest ML investors first spend time building up a robust data and code

For additional readings, see, for example, López de Prado (2018); Arnott, Harvey, and Markowitz (2019); Leung et al. (2021).

10

See Hastie et al. (2009) and Goodfellow et al. (2016) for more discussion on these techniques.

11

For more details, see Swinkels and Hoogteijling (2022).

12

See Jessen and Lando (2013) for more discussion on distance to default.

13

See Harvey, Liu, and Zhu (2016) and Hou, Xue, and Zhang (2020) for more discussion on the replicability crisis in finance.

14

6

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 3. SHAP Value between Input Features and ML Output Predicting
Financial Distress
High
Feature 25
Feature 1
Feature 4
Feature 35
Feature 38
Feature 23
Feature 5
Feature 24
Feature Value

Feature 32
Feature 40
Feature 26
Feature 41
Feature 36
Feature 14
Feature 47
Feature 43
Feature 28
Feature 6
Feature 45
Feature 11

Low
–0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

SHAP Value (impact on model output)
Source: Swinkels and Hoogteijling (2022).

infrastructure to conduct ML research and experiments.
This includes, but is not limited to, the following:
•

A robust system for code version control, a way to
specify and fix all parameters used in the algorithm,
including ML algorithm version number, investment
universe tested, hyperparameters, feature sets used,
and so on

•

Documentation of all the tested iterations and hypotheses, including those that failed to show good results
(in other words, showing the research graveyards)

Such documentation listed above may not be possible
regarding publicly disclosed results, but it should at least
be attempted when discussing and verifying results within
the same organization.

Lookahead bias/data leakage
Lookahead bias is another commonly known issue for
experienced quant investors that applies to ML. An example
would be that if quarterly results are available only 40 days
after the quarter end, the quarterly data should be used
only when available historically15 and not at the quarter
end date.

This is called “point-in-time” in the quant investment industry.

15

CFA Institute Research Foundation

7

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Other cases can be more subtle. For example, if one conducts research over a period that includes the tech bubble
and its subsequent crash (2000–2002) and the investment
universe tested does not include information technology
(IT) firms, then it is incumbent upon the investor to provide
a sensible reason why IT firms are not included.
Related to lookahead bias and a more general problem
directly related to ML is the problem of data leakage. Data
leakage occurs when data used in the training set contain
information that can be used to infer the prediction, information that would otherwise not be available to the ML
model in live production.
Because financial data occur in time series, they are often
divided chronologically into training, validation, and testing
sets. ML predictive modeling aims to predict outcomes the
model has not seen before. One form of data leakage can
occur if information that should be in one set ends up in
another among the three sets of data (training, validation,
and testing). When this occurs, the ML algorithm is evaluated on the data it has seen. In such cases, the results will
be overly optimistic and true out-of-sample performance
(that is, the live performance of the algorithm) will likely
disappoint. This phenomenon is called “leakage in data.”
Another type of data leakage is called “leakage in features.”
Leakage in features occurs when informative features about
the prediction outcome are included but would otherwise
be unavailable to ML models at production time, even if
the information is not in the future. For example, suppose
a company’s key executive is experiencing serious health
issues but the executive has not disclosed this fact to the
general public. In that case, including that information in the
ML feature set may generate strong backtest performance,
but it would be an example of feature leakage.
Various techniques can be applied to minimize the possibility of data leakage. One of the most basic is to introduce a
sufficient gap period between training and validation sets
and between validation and testing. For example, instead of
having validation sets begin immediately after the end of the
training set, introduce a time gap of between a few months
and a few quarters to ensure complete separation of data.
To prevent data leakage, investors applying ML should think
carefully about what is available and what is not during the
model development and testing phases. In short, common
sense still needs to prevail when applying ML algorithms.

defined as trading instruments in the backtest that are
either impossible or infeasible to trade in live production.
An example of an implementation gap is that the ML algorithm generates its outperformance in the backtest mainly
from small- or micro-cap stocks. However, in live trading,
either these small- or micro-cap stocks may be too costly
to trade because of transaction costs or there might not be
enough outstanding shares available to own in the scale
that would make a difference to the strategy deploying
the ML algorithm. As mentioned, implementation affects
all quant strategies, not just those using ML algorithms.
But ML algorithms tend to have high turnover, increasing
trading cost associated with smaller market-cap securities.
Similar to small- or micro-cap stocks, another example of an
implementation gap is shorting securities in a long–short
strategy. In practice, shorting stocks might be impossible
or infeasible because of an insufficient quantity of a given
stock to short or excessive short borrowing costs.16

Explainability and performance attribution
A main criticism of applying machine learning in finance is
that the models are difficult to understand. According to Gu
et al. (2020, p. 2258), “Machine learning models are often
referred to as ‘black boxes,’ a term that is in some sense a
misnomer, as the models are readily inspectable. However,
they are complex, and this is the source of their power and
opacity. Any exploration of the interaction effect is vexed
by vast possibilities for identity and functional forms for
interacting predictors.”
Machine learning for other applications might not need to
be fully explainable at all times; for example, if the ML algorithm suggests wrong video recommendations based on
the viewers’ past viewing history, the consequences are
not catastrophic. However, with billions of investment dollars on the line, asset owners demand managers that use
ML-based algorithms explain how the investment decisions
are made and how performance can be attributed. In recent
years, explainable machine learning has emerged in the
financial domain as a focus topic for both practitioners and
academics.17
The fundamental approach to recent explainable machine
learning work is as follows:
1.

For each input feature, fi, in the ML algorithm, fix its
value as x. Combine this fixed value for fi with all other
sample data while replacing feature fi with the value x.
Obtain the prediction output.

2.

Average the resulting predictions. This is the partial
prediction at point x.

Implementation gap
Another possible pitfall to watch out for when deploying ML
algorithms in finance is the so-called implementation gap,

For additional readings, see, for example, Avramov, Chordia, and Goyal (2006); López de Prado (2018); Hou et al. (2020); Avramov, Cheng, and
Metzker (2022).
16

In addition to the SHAP values discussed in Lundberg and Lee (2017), recent works in the area of explainable machine learning include Li,
Turkington, and Yazdani (2020); Li, Simon, and Turkington (2022); and Daul, Jaisson, and Nagy (2022).
17

8

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

3.

Now range the fixed value x over feature fi’s typical
range to plot out the resulting function. This is called
the “partial dependence response” to feature fi.

This response plot, an example of which is illustrated in
Exhibit 4, can then be decomposed into linear and nonlinear components.
Similarly, one can estimate the pairwise-interaction part
of the ML algorithm, computed using joint partial prediction of features fi and fj, by subtracting the partial prediction of each feature independently. An example of the
pairwise-interaction result is shown in Exhibit 5.
Exhibits 3–5 allow ML investors to understand how the
input features affect the output prediction. To conduct
performance attribution of an ML portfolio and decompose
it into the various parts (linear, interaction, and nonlinear),
one can extract the partial dependence responses and
form portfolios from them. With this approach, one can get
return attribution, as shown in Exhibit 6.

Sample ML Applications
in Finance

Predicting Cross-Sectional Stock
Returns
In this section, we discuss specifically using ML to predict
cross-sectional stock returns.

Investment problem
Perhaps the most obvious application of ML to financial
investments is to directly use ML to predict whether each
security’s price is expected to rise or fall and whether to
buy or sell those securities. Numerous practitioners and
academics have applied ML algorithms to this prediction
task.19
The ML algorithms used in this problem are set up to
compare cross-sectional stock returns. That is, we are
interested in finding the relative returns of securities in our
investment universe rather than their absolute returns.20
The ML algorithms make stock selection decisions rather
than country/industry timing and allocation decisions.
Stock selection is an easier problem than the timing and
allocation problem, because the algorithms have more data
to work with.21

We have seen the common pitfalls when applying ML to
finance and the strategies to mitigate them. Let us now
look at examples of ML applied to financial investing.18

Exhibit 4. Linear and Nonlinear Decomposition of an ML Algorithm’s Output
to Input Feature fi
0.3%

0.2%

0.2%

0.1%

0.1%

0.1%

0.0%
–0.1%

Response

0.2%
Response

Response

Partial Prediction (left), Linear Effect (middle), and Nonlinear Effect (right)
0.3%
0.3%

0.0%
–0.1%

0.0%
–0.1%

–0.2%

–0.2%

–0.2%

–0.3%
–0.6%–0.4%–0.2%0.0% 0.2% 0.3% 0.5%
Predictor

–0.3%
–0.6%–0.4%–0.2% 0.0% 0.2% 0.3% 0.5%
Predictor

–0.3%
–0.6%–0.4%–0.2%0.0% 0.2% 0.3% 0.5%
Predictor

Partial Dependence

Average Prediction

Linear Fit

Source: Li, Turkington, and Yazdani (2020).

For more general applications of ML to finance, see López de Prado (2019).

18

This problem has been studied in numerous recent papers—for example, Abe and Nakayama (2018); Rasekhschaffe and Jones (2019); Gu et al.
(2020); Choi, Jiang, and Zhang (2022); Hanauer and Kalsbach (2022).
19

In addition to cross-sectional returns, Gu et al. (2020) also study the time-series problem.

20

However, when compared with other fields, the amount of data here is still miniscule, as noted before.

21

CFA Institute Research Foundation

9

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

1.0

0.4%

0.4%

0.3%

0.2%

0.1%

0.0%

–0.1%

–0.3%

–0.4%

–0.6%

0.4%

0.9

0.3%

0.3%

0.2%

0.1%

0.1%

0.0%

–0.1%

–0.2%

–0.3%

–0.4%

0.3%

0.8

0.2%

0.1%

0.1%

0.1%

0.1%

0.0%

0.0%

–0.1%

–0.2%

–0.3%

0.2%

0.7

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

–0.1%

–0.1%

0.1%

0.6

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.4

–0.1%

–0.1%

–0.1%

–0.1%

0.0%

0.0%

0.0%

0.1%

0.1%

0.2%

0.3

–0.2%

–0.2%

–0.1%

–0.1%

0.0%

0.0%

0.1%

0.1%

0.2%

0.3%

–0.2%

0.2

–0.2%

–0.2%

–0.2%

–0.1%

–0.1%

0.0%

0.1%

0.1%

0.2%

0.3%

–0.3%

0.1

–0.2%

–0.2%

–0.2%

–0.1%

–0.1%

0.0%

0.1%

0.2%

0.3%

0.4%

–0.4%

0.0

–0.3%

–0.2%

–0.2%

–0.1%

–0.1%

0.0%

0.1%

0.2%

0.3%

0.4%

–0.6%

–0.5%

–0.4%

–0.3%

–0.2%

–0.1%
0.0%
Predictor 1

0.1%

0.2%

0.3%

0.4%

Response

Predictor 2

Exhibit 5. Example of the Pairwise-Interaction Effect

0.0%
–0.1%

Source: Li, Simon, and Turkington (2022).

Exhibit 6. Example ML Portfolio Return Attribution
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

ST Revisions
Flow
Sector
Beta
Volatility
Portfolio

Linear

Interactions Nonlinear

ST Momentum
Reversal
Revisions
Quality
Value

Portfolio

Linear

Interactions

0%
–1
.0
0
–0 %
.5
0%
0.
00
%
0.
50
%
1.0
0%
1.5
0%
2.
00
%
2.
50
%
3.
00
%
3.
50
%

–1
.5

19
No
v19
Ap
r-2
0
Se
p20
Fe
b21
Ju
l-2
1
De
c21
M
ay
-2
2

nJu

19

Momentum

Ja
n-

60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
–10%

Attribution

Nonlinear

Portfolio

Linear

Interactions

Nonlinear

Source: Robeco.

Methodology
This problem is set up with the following three major
components:
1.

Investment universe: US, international, emerging
market, and so on

2.

ML algorithms: (boosted) trees/random forests, neural
networks with l layers, and so on, and ensembles thereof

10

CFA Institute Research Foundation

3.

Feature set: typical financial metrics that are used
in linear models, such as various price ratios (value),
profitability (quality), and past returns (momentum)

Note that for Item 3, by using a very limited feature set, the
ML investor is essentially applying her domain knowledge
and imposing a structure on the ML algorithm to counter
the limited data challenge discussed in the previous
section.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Results

study in equity return prediction (Gu et al. 2020) found that
the strategy has an annualized out-of-sample Sharpe ratio
of 1.35 under value weighting and 2.45 under equal weighting. For comparison, the same portfolio constructed from
ordinary least squares (OLS) prediction with the same input
features produced a Sharpe ratio of 0.61 and 0.83 for value
weighting and equal weighting, respectively. Exhibit 7
shows the value-weighting results.

There are five consistent results that various practitioner
and academic studies have found. First and foremost,
there is a statistically significant and economically meaningful outperformance of ML algorithm prediction versus
the traditional linear approach. For example, in forming a
long–short decile spread portfolio from (four-layer) neural
network–generated stock return prediction, a well-known

Exhibit 7. Out-of-Sample Performance of Benchmark OLS Portfolio
vs. Various ML Portfolios, Value Weighting
OLS-3+H

PLS

PCR

Pred.

Avg.

Std.
Dev.

Sharpe
Ratio

Pred.

Avg.

Std.
Dev.

Sharpe
Ratio

Pred.

Avg.

Std.
Dev.

Sharpe
Ratio

Low (L)

−0.17

0.40

5.90

0.24

−0.83

0.29

5.31

0.19

−0.68

0.03

5.98

0.02

2

0.17

0.58

4.65

0.43

−0.21

0.55

4.96

0.38

−0.11

0.42

5.25

0.28

3

0.35

0.60

4.43

0.47

0.12

0.64

4.63

0.48

0.19

0.53

4.94

0.37

4

0.49

0.71

4.32

0.57

0.38

0.78

4.30

0.63

0.42

0.68

4.64

0.51

5

0.62

0.79

4.57

0.60

0.61

0.77

4.53

0.59

0.62

0.81

4.66

0.60

6

0.75

0.92

5.03

0.63

0.84

0.88

4.78

0.64

0.81

0.81

4.58

0.61

7

0.88

0.85

5.18

0.57

1.06

0.92

4.89

0.65

1.01

0.87

4.72

0.64

8

1.02

0.86

5.29

0.56

1.32

0.92

5.14

0.62

1.23

1.01

4.77

0.73

9

1.21

1.18

5.47

0.75

1.66

1.15

5.24

0.76

1.52

1.20

4.88

0.86

High (H)

1.51

1.34

5.88

0.79

2.25

1.30

5.85

0.77

2.02

1.25

5.60

0.77

H–L

1.67

0.94

5.33

0.61

3.09

1.02

4.88

0.72

2.70

1.22

4.82

0.88

ENet+H

GLM+H

RF

Pred

Avg

Std.
Dev.

Sharpe
Ratio

Pred

Avg

Std.
Dev.

Sharpe
Ratio

Pred

Avg

Std.
Dev.

Sharpe
Ratio

Low (L)

−0.04

0.24

5.44

0.15

−0.47

0.08

5.65

0.05

0.29

−0.09

6.00

−0.05

2

0.27

0.56

4.84

0.40

0.01

0.49

4.80

0.35

0.44

0.38

5.02

0.27

3

0.44

0.53

4.50

0.40

0.29

0.65

4.52

0.50

0.53

0.64

4.70

0.48

4

0.59

0.72

4.11

0.61

0.50

0.72

4.59

0.55

0.60

0.60

4.56

0.46

5

0.73

0.72

4.42

0.57

0.68

0.70

4.55

0.53

0.67

0.57

4.51

0.44

6

0.87

0.85

4.60

0.64

0.84

0.84

4.53

0.65

0.73

0.64

4.54

0.49

7

1.01

0.87

4.75

0.64

1.00

0.86

4.82

0.62

0.80

0.67

4.65

0.50

8

1.16

0.88

5.20

0.59

1.18

0.87

5.18

0.58

0.87

1.00

4.91

0.71

9

1.36

0.80

5.61

0.50

1.40

1.04

5.44

0.66

0.96

1.23

5.59

0.76

High (H)

1.66

0.84

6.76

0.43

1.81

1.14

6.33

0.62

1.12

1.53

7.27

0.73

H–L

1.70

0.60

5.37

0.39

2.27

1.06

4.79

0.76

0.83

1.62

5.75

0.98
(continued)

CFA Institute Research Foundation

11

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 7. Out-of-Sample Performance of Benchmark OLS Portfolio
vs. Various ML Portfolios, Value Weighting (continued)
GBRT+H

NN1

NN2

Pred

Avg

Std.
Dev.

Sharpe
Ratio

Pred

Avg

Std.
Dev.

Sharpe
Ratio

Pred

Avg

Std.
Dev.

Sharpe
Ratio

Low (L)

−0.45

0.18

5.60

0.11

−0.38

−0.29

7.02

−0.14

−0.23

−0.54

7.83

−0.24

2

−0.16

0.49

4.93

0.35

0.16

0.41

5.89

0.24

0.21

0.36

6.08

0.20

3

0.02

0.59

4.75

0.43

0.44

0.51

5.07

0.35

0.44

0.65

5.07

0.44

4

0.17

0.63

4.68

0.46

0.64

0.70

4.56

0.53

0.59

0.73

4.53

0.56

5

0.34

0.57

4.70

0.42

0.80

0.77

4.37

0.61

0.72

0.81

4.38

0.64

6

0.46

0.77

4.48

0.59

0.95

0.78

4.39

0.62

0.84

0.84

4.51

0.65

7

0.59

0.52

4.73

0.38

1.11

0.81

4.40

0.64

0.97

0.95

4.61

0.71

8

0.72

0.72

4.92

0.51

1.31

0.75

4.86

0.54

1.13

0.93

5.09

0.63

9

0.88

0.99

5.19

0.66

1.58

0.96

5.22

0.64

1.37

1.04

5.69

0.63

High (H)

1.11

1.17

5.88

0.69

2.19

1.52

6.79

0.77

1.99

1.38

6.98

0.69

H–L

1.56

0.99

4.22

0.81

2.57

1.81

5.34

1.17

2.22

1.92

5.75

1.16

NN3

NN4

NN5

Pred

Avg

Std.
Dev.

Sharpe
Ratio

Pred

Avg

Std.
Dev.

Sharpe
Ratio

Pred

Avg

Std.
Dev.

Sharpe
Ratio

Low (L)

−0.03

−0.43

7.73

−0.19

−0.12

−0.52

7.69

−0.23

−0.23

−0.51

7.69

−0.23

2

0.34

0.30

6.38

0.16

0.30

0.33

6.16

0.19

0.23

0.31

6.10

0.17

3

0.51

0.57

5.27

0.37

0.50

0.42

5.18

0.28

0.45

0.54

5.02

0.37

4

0.63

0.66

4.69

0.49

0.62

0.60

4.51

0.46

0.60

0.67

4.47

0.52

5

0.71

0.69

4.41

0.55

0.72

0.69

4.26

0.56

0.73

0.77

4.32

0.62

6

0.79

0.76

4.46

0.59

0.81

0.84

4.46

0.65

0.85

0.86

4.35

0.68

7

0.88

0.99

4.77

0.72

0.90

0.93

4.56

0.70

0.96

0.88

4.76

0.64

8

1.00

1.09

5.47

0.69

1.03

1.08

5.13

0.73

1.11

0.94

5.17

0.63

9

1.21

1.25

5.94

0.73

1.23

1.26

5.93

0.74

1.34

1.02

6.02

0.58

High (H)

1.83

1.69

7.29

0.80

1.89

1.75

7.51

0.81

1.99

1.46

7.40

0.68

H–L

1.86

2.12

6.13

1.20

2.01

2.26

5.80

1.35

2.22

1.97

5.93

1.15

Notes: OLS-3+H is ordinary least squares that preselect size, book-to-market, and momentum using Huber loss rather than the standard l2 loss.
PLS is partial least squares. PCR ENet+H, GLM+H, RF, GBRT+H, and NN1 to NN5 are neural networks with one to five hidden layers.
Source: Gu et al. (2020).

12

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

The second consistent result is that what drives the outperformance of ML-based prediction versus that of linear
models is that ML algorithms not only are limited to linear
combinations of feature sets but can formulate higher-order
functional dependencies, such as nonlinearity and interaction. To test whether higher-order effects can contribute to
security prediction, one can compare linear machine learning models (for example, LASSO and RIDGE) with models that
consider nonlinear and complex interaction effects (such
as trees and neural networks). Investors at Robeco have
found that higher-order machine learning models outperform their simpler linear competitors. The outperformance of
higher-order machine learning models was also confirmed
by academics,22 as evident from Exhibit 7.
Between nonlinearity and interactions, interactions have the
greater impact on model performance. This also can be seen
in Exhibit 7, where the performance of the generalized linear
model with Huber loss (GLM+H) is inferior to those models
that consider interaction, boosted trees, and neural networks.
Third, ML investors have found that the features that most
determine prediction outcomes are remarkably consistent regardless of the specific ML algorithms used. This
is somewhat of a surprise because the various ML algorithms, such as boosted trees and neural networks, use
dissimilar approaches to arrive at their outcomes. However,
the similar importance assigned to certain input features
confirms that these are salient characteristics that drive
cross-sectional stock returns. From Robeco’s own experience and various published studies, the characteristics
that dominate cross-sectional returns are found to be
short-term reversals, stock and sector return momentum,
return volatility, and firm size.
Fourth, simple ML algorithms outperform more complicated
ML algorithms. This result is very likely because, since there
are not much data to train on, the simpler models, due
to their parsimonious nature, are less likely to overfit and
thereby perform better out of sample. We confirm this observation from Exhibit 7, where the best out-of-sample Sharpe
ratio is achieved by a neural network with four hidden layers.
Fifth, the more data there are, the better the ML prediction
algorithm performs. This is fundamental to the nature of ML
algorithms, as observed by Halevy et al. (2009) for general
machine learning applications and confirmed by Choi, Jiang,
and Zhang (2022) in a financial context.

Predicting Stock Crashes

Investment problem
Rather than predicting the rank order of future returns,
another application for ML algorithms may simply be to predict the worst-performing stocks—that is, those most likely
to crash.23 The results of this prediction can be applied
in such strategies as conservative equities,24 where the
securities most likely to crash are excluded from the
investment universe. That is, win by not losing.

Methodology
A crash event for equities is defined as a significant drop
in a stock’s price relative to peers; thus, it is idiosyncratic
rather than systematic when a group of stocks or the
market crashes. The ML prediction is set up as follows:
1.

Investment universe: US, international, emerging
market, and so on

2.

ML algorithms: logistic regression, random forest, gradient boosted tree, and ensemble of the three

3.

Feature set: various financial distress indicators—such
as distance to default, volatility, and market beta—in
addition to traditional fundamental financial metrics

As one can see, the problem setup is very similar to that
of cross-sectional stock return prediction. The main differences are the objective function of the ML algorithm
(ML prediction goal) and the input feature set (feature engineering). Care should be taken in determining both components to ensure the prediction algorithm solves the stated
problem and performs well out of sample.

Results
The performance of the portfolio of stocks with the highest
distress probability versus that of the market is shown in
Exhibit 8. We see that the performance of the ML algorithm
is greater than that obtained using traditional approaches
for both developed and emerging markets.
Looking at the sector composition of the likely distressed
stocks, shown in Exhibit 9, we see that the ML algorithm
choices are reasonable, as technology stocks dominated
during the bursting of the dot-com bubble in the early
2000s and financial stocks dominated during the Global
Financial Crisis of 2008. Overall, we see a wide sector dispersion for the likely distressed stocks, indicating that the
prediction return is mostly from stock selection rather than
sector allocation.

In this section, we discuss the example of using ML to
predict stock crashes.

For more discussion, see Choi, Jiang, and Zhang (2022) and Gu et al. (2020).

22

This ML prediction task is studied in Swinkels and Hoogteijling (2022).

23

Also called low-volatility equity, among other names.

24

CFA Institute Research Foundation

13

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 8. Market Return vs. Return of a Portfolio Consisting of Likely
Distressed Stocks, Estimated under Various Prediction Approaches
14%
12%
10%

11.6%
10.0%

8%

7.0%

6.3%
5.0%

6%

4.7%

4.5%

4.2%

4%

2.3%

2%
0%
–2%

–1.5%

–4%
Market

Volatility

Beta

Developed Markets

Distance to Default

ML

Emerging Markets

Source: Swinkels and Hoogteijling (2022).

Exhibit 9. Sector Composition of the ML-Predicted Likely Distressed Stocks
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Jan-02

Jan-04

Jan-06

Jan-08

Jan-10

Jan-12

Jan-14

Jan-16

Jan-18

Energy

Materials

Industrials

Consumer Disc.

Consumer Staples

Health Care

Financials

IT

Telecomm.

Utilities

Real Estate

Jan-20

Source: Swinkels and Hoogteijling (2022).

Predicting Fundamental Variables
In this section, we discuss the example of using ML to predict company fundamentals.

Investment problem
Predicting stock returns is notoriously hard. As mentioned
previously, there are potentially thousands of variables
14

CFA Institute Research Foundation

(dimensions) that can affect a stock’s performance—
investor sentiment, path dependency, and so on. The various factors, endogenous and exogenous, ultimately get
translated into only a one-dimensional response—higher
return (up) or lower return (down). An easier task may be
to use ML algorithms to predict company fundamentals,
such as return on assets and corporate earnings. Company
fundamentals also have the additional beneficial characteristic of being more stable than stock returns, making them

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

better suited for ML predictions. Because of these reasons,
company fundamentals prediction is another popular application of ML algorithms in the financial domain. In this section, we look at the findings from a popular study25 where
ML algorithm-predicted earnings forecasts are compared
with those from more traditional approaches.

Methodology
The investment universe is the US stock market, excluding
the financial and utility sectors. The study was conducted
over the period 1975–2019.
Six different ML models were tested: three linear ML models
(OLS, LASSO, and ridge regression) and three nonlinear
ML models (random forest, gradient boosting regression,
and neural networks). Six traditional models were used
as a benchmark to compare against ML models: random
walk, autoregressive model, models from Hou, van Dijk,
and Zhang (2012; HVZ) and So (2013; SO), the earnings
persistence model, and the residual income model. Various
ensembles of these models were also tested.
The feature set is composed of 28 major financial statement line items and their first-order differences. So, there
are 56 features in total.

Results
The results are shown in Exhibit 10. Consistent with the
results for cross-sectional stock returns, Cao and You
(2021) found that machine learning models give more
accurate earnings forecasts. The linear ML models are
more accurate than the benchmark traditional models (by
about 6%), and the nonlinear ML models are more accurate
than the linear ML models (by about 1%–3% on top of the
linear model). Not only are the ML models more accurate;
the traditional models autoregression, HVZ, SO, earnings
persistence, and residual income were not more accurate
than the naive random walk model. The ensemble models,
traditional or machine learned, were more accurate than
the individual models alone, with the order of accuracy preserved: ML ensemble beating traditional methods, ensemble and nonlinear ML ensemble beating linear ML ensemble.
The ML models’ better performance can be attributed to the
following:
•

They are learning economically meaningful predictors
of future earnings. One can make this conclusion by
examining feature importance through such tools as
Shapley value.

•

The nonlinearity and interaction effects are useful in
further refining the accuracy of forward earnings predictions, as evidenced by the higher performance of
nonlinear ML models compared with linear ML models.

The takeaway from this study is the same as in the previous two examples. That is, ML models can provide value
on top of traditional models (especially due to nonlinearity
and interaction components), and ensembling is one of the
closest things to a free lunch in ML, much like diversification for investing.

NLP in Multiple Languages
So far, we have discussed problems where ML algorithms
are used for prediction. Another major category for ML
applications is textual language reading, understanding,
and analysis, which is called “natural language processing” (NLP). Modern NLP techniques use neural networks to
achieve the great capability improvements they have made
in recent years. NLP is discussed in other chapters of this
book, so we will not discuss the techniques extensively
here, but we will discuss one NLP application that can be
interesting for practitioners.

Investment problem
Investing is a global business, and much of the relevant
information for security returns is written in the local language. In general, a global portfolio may invest in 20–30
different countries,26 while a typical investor may understand only two or three languages, if that. This fact presents a problem, but fortunately, it is a problem that we can
attempt to solve through ML algorithms.
From the perspective of Western investors, one language
of interest is Chinese. The Chinese A-share market is
both large and liquid. But understanding Chinese texts on
A-share investing can be challenging because Chinese is
not an alphabetical language and it follows very different
grammatical constructs than English. In addition, since
retail investors dominate the Chinese A-share market,27
a subculture of investment slang has developed, where
terms used are often not standard Chinese, thereby compounding the problem for investors without a strong local
language understanding.
In a paper by Chen, Lee, and Mussalli (2020), the authors
applied ML-based NLP techniques to try to understand
investment slang written in Mandarin Chinese by retail
investors in online stock discussion forums. We discuss the
results of that paper here.

For more details, see Cao and You (2021). The problem of ML company fundamentals prediction was also examined in Alberg and Lipton (2017).

25

The MSCI All Country World Index (ACWI) covers stocks from 26 countries.

26

Some studies have concluded that in the A-share market, retail trading volume can be up to 80% of the total. In recent years, institutional
market trading has proportionally increased as the Chinese market matures.
27

CFA Institute Research Foundation

15

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 10. Prediction Accuracy Results from Cao and You (2021)
Mean Absolute Forecast Errors

Median Absolute Forecast Errors

Comparison with RW
Average

DIFF

t-Stat

Comparison with RW
%DIFF

Average

DIFF

t-Stat

%DIFF

Benchmark model
RW

0.0764

0.0309
Extant models

AR

0.0755

−0.0009

−2.51

−1.15%

0.0308

−0.0001

−0.22

−0.24%

HYZ

0.0743

−0.0022

−3.63

−2.82%

0.0311

0.0002

0.64

0.76%

EP

0.0742

−0.0022

−2.79

−2.85%

0.0313

0.0004

1.02

1.42%

RI

0.0741

−0.0023

−3.15

−3.07%

0.0311

0.0002

0.66

0.74%

SO

0.0870

0.0105

5.19

13.78%

0.0347

0.0039

5.50

12.56%

Linear machine learning models
OLS

0.0720

−0.0045

−5.04

−5.83%

0.0306

−0.0002

−0.60

−0.73%

LASSO

0.0716

−0.0048

−5.32

−6.31%

0.0304

−0.0004

−1.11

−1.43%

Ridge

0.0718

−0.0047

−5.19

−6.11%

0.0305

−0.0003

−0.87

−1.08%

Nonlinear machine learning models
RF

0.0698

−0.0066

−6.44

−8.64%

0.0296

−0.0012

−3.10

−3.97%

GBR

0.0697

−0.0068

−6.08

−8.86%

0.0292

−0.0016

−4.23

−5.34%

ANN

0.0713

−0.0051

−5.38

−6.67%

0.0310

0.0001

0.24

0.38%

Composite models
COMP_EXT

0.0737

−0.0027

−3.89

−3.58%

0.0311

0.0002

0.56

0.66%

COMP_LR

0.0717

−0.0047

−5.25

−6.16%

0.0305

−0.0004

−1.02

−1.33%

COMP_NL

0.0689

−0.0075

−6.99

−9.87%

0.0292

−0.0017

−3.92

−5.55%

COMP_ML

0.0693

−0.0071

−7.12

−9.35%

0.0294

−0.0015

−3.75

−4.81%

Notes: RW stands for random walk. AR is the autoregressive model. HVZ is the model from Hou et al. (2012). SO is the model from So (2013).
EP is the earnings persistence model. RI is the residual income model. RF stands for random forests. GBR stands for gradient boost regression.
ANN stands for artificial neural networks. COMP_EXT is an ensemble of traditional models. COMP_LR is an ensemble of linear ML models. COMP_NL
is an ensemble of nonlinear ML models. COMP_ML is an ensemble of all ML models.
Source: Cao and You (2021).

Methodology
1.

Download and process investment blogs actively participated in by Chinese A-share retail investors.

2.

Apply embedding-based NLP techniques and train on
the downloaded investment blogs.

3.

Starting with standard Chinese sentiment dictionaries,
look for words surrounding these standard Chinese
sentiment words. By the construct of the embedding

16

CFA Institute Research Foundation

models, these surrounding words often have the same
contextual meaning as the words in the standard
sentiment dictionaries, whether they are standard
Chinese or slang. An example of this is shown in
Exhibit 11.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Results
Using this technique, we can detect investment words
used in standard Chinese and the slang used by retail
investors. In Exhibit 11, the red dot illustrates the Chinese
word for “central bank.” The column on the right side of
Exhibit 11 shows the words closest to this word, and the
closest is the word that translates to “central mother”
in Chinese. This is a slang word often used by Chinese
retail investors as a substitute for the word “central bank”
because central banks often take actions to calm down

market tantrums, much like a mother does to her children
when they have tantrums.
The embedded words also exhibit the same embedded
word vector arithmetic made famous by the following
example (see Mikolov, Yih, and Zweig 2013): King – Man +
Woman ≈ Queen. For example, Exhibit 12 shows the
following embedded Chinese word relationship: Floating
red – Rise + Fall ≈ Floating green.28

Exhibit 11. Embedded Chinese Words from A-Share Investor Blogs Projected
onto a 3-D Space

Source: Chen et al. (2020).

Exhibit 12. Chinese Word Embedding Still Preserves Vector Arithmetic
Source: Chen et al. (2020).

In contrast to most of the world’s markets, in the Chinese stock market, gains are colored red whereas losses are colored green.

28

CFA Institute Research Foundation

17

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

This study illustrates that ML techniques not only are
useful for numerical tasks of results prediction but can
also be useful in other tasks, such as foreign language
understanding.

Conclusion
In this chapter, we gave an overview of how ML can be
applied in financial investing. Because there is a lot of
excitement around the promise of ML for finance, we
began the chapter with a discussion on how the financial market is different from other domains in which ML
has made tremendous strides in recent years and how it
would serve the financial ML practitioner to not get carried
away by the hype. Applying ML to the financial market is
different from applying ML in other domains in that the
financial market does not have as much data, the market
is nonstationary, the market can often behave irrationally
because human investor emotions are often a big driver
of market returns, and so on. Given these differences, we
discussed several common pitfalls and potential mitigation strategies when applying machine learning to financial investing.
In the second half of the chapter, we discussed several
recent studies that have applied ML techniques to investment problems. Common findings of these studies are
as follows:
•

ML techniques can deliver performance above and
beyond traditional approaches if applied to the right
problem.

•

The source of ML algorithms’ outperformance includes
the ability to consider nonlinear and interaction effects
among the input features.

•

Ensembling of ML algorithms often delivers better
performance than what individual ML algorithms can
achieve.

We showed that in addition to predicting numerical results,
ML could also help investors in other tasks, such as sentiment analysis or foreign language understanding. Of
course, the applications discussed here are only a small
subset of what ML can do in the financial domain. Other
possible tasks include data cleaning, fraud detection,
credit scoring, and trading optimization.
Machine learning is a powerful set of tools for investors,
and we are just at the beginning of the journey of applying
ML to the investment domain. Like all techniques, machine
learning is powerful only if applied to the right problems
and if practitioners know the technique’s limits. Having said
that, we believe one can expect to see a lot more innovation and improved results coming out of this space going
forward.

18

CFA Institute Research Foundation

References
Abe, M., and H. Nakayama. 2018. “Deep Learning for
Forecasting Stock Returns in the Cross-Section.” In
Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
edited by D. Phung, V. Tseng, G. Webb, B. Ho, M. Ganji,
and L. Rashidi, 273–84. Berlin: Springer Cham.
Alberg, J., and Z. Lipton. 2017. “Improving FactorBased Quantitative Investing by Forecasting Company
Fundamentals.” Cornell University, arXiv:1711.04837
(13 November). https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.04837.
Arnott, R., C. Harvey, and H. Markowitz. 2019. “A Backtesting
Protocol in the Era of Machine Learning.” Journal of Financial
Data Science 1 (1): 64–74.
Avramov, D., S. Cheng, and L. Metzker. 2022. “Machine
Learning vs. Economic Restrictions: Evidence from Stock
Return Predictability.” Management Science (29 June).
Avramov, D., T. Chordia, and A. Goyal. 2006. “Liquidity and
Autocorrelations in Individual Stock Returns.” Journal of
Finance 61 (5): 2365–94.
Birge, J., and Y. Zhang. 2018. “Risk Factors That Explain
Stock Returns: A Non-Linear Factor Pricing Model.” Working
paper (9 August).
Cao, K., and H. You. 2021. “Fundamental Analysis via
Machine Learning.” Emerging Finance and Financial
Practices eJournal.
Cao, Larry. 2018. “Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning,
and Deep Learning: A Primer.” Enterprising Investor
(blog; 13 February). https://blogs.cfainstitute.org/
investor/2018/02/13/artificial-intelligence-machinelearning-and-deep-learning-in-investment-managementa-primer/.
Chen, M., J. Lee, and G. Mussalli. 2020. “Teaching Machines
to Understand Chinese Investment Slang.” Journal of
Financial Data Science 2 (1): 116–25.
Choi, D., W. Jiang, and C. Zhang. 2022. “Alpha Go Everywhere:
Machine Learning and International Stock Returns.” Working
paper (29 November). Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3489679.
Columbus, Louis. 2020. “The State of AI Adoption In Financial
Services.” Forbes (31 October). www.forbes.com/sites/
louiscolumbus/2020/10/31/the-state-of-ai-adoption-infinancial-services/?sh=1a4f7be62aac.
Daul, S., T. Jaisson, and A. Nagy. 2022. “Performance
Attribution of Machine Learning Methods for Stock
Returns Prediction.” Journal of Finance and Data Science
8 (November): 86–104.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Fama, E., and K. French. 1993. “Common Risk Factors in
the Returns on Stocks and Bonds.” Journal of Financial
Economics 33 (1): 3–56.
Goodfellow, I., Y. Bengio, and A. Courville. 2016. Deep
Learning. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Grinold, R., and R. Kahn. 1999. Active Portfolio Management:
A Quantitative Approach for Producing Superior Returns and
Controlling Risk. New York: McGraw Hill.
Gu, S., B. Kelly, and D. Xiu. 2020. “Empirical Asset Pricing
via Machine Learning.” Review of Financial Studies 33 (5):
2223–73.
Halevy, A., P. Norvig, and F. Pereira. 2009. “The Unreasonable
Effectiveness of Data.” IEEE Intelligent Systems 24 (2):
8–12.
Hanauer, M., and T. Kalsbach. 2022. “Machine Learning and
the Cross-Section of Emerging Market Stock Returns.”
Working paper (5 December).
Harvey, C., Y. Liu, and H. Zhu. 2016. “… and the Cross-Section
of Expected Returns.” Review of Financial Studies 29 (1):
5-68.
Hastie, T., R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman. 2009. The Elements
of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and
Prediction, 2nd ed. New York: Springer.
Hou, K., M. van Dijk, and Y. Zhang. 2012. “The Implied Cost
of Capital: A New Approach.” Journal of Accounting and
Economics 53 (3): 504–26.
Hou, K., C. Xue, and L. Zhang. 2020. “Replicating Anomalies.”
Review of Financial Studies 33 (5): 2019–133.
Jessen, C., and D. Lando. 2013. “Robustness of Distanceto-Default.” 26th Australasian Finance and Banking
Conference 2013 (16 August).
Leippold, M., Q. Wang, and W. Zhou. 2022. “Machine
Learning in the Chinese Stock Market.” Journal of Financial
Economics 145 (2): 64–82.
Leung, E., H. Lohre, D. Mischlich, Y. Shea, and M. Stroh.
2021. “The Promises and Pitfalls of Machine Learning for
Predicting Stock Returns.” Journal of Financial Data Science
3 (2): 21–50.
Li, Y., Z. Simon, and D. Turkington. 2022. “Investable and
Interpretable Machine Learning for Equities.” Journal of
Financial Data Science 4 (1): 54–74.

Li, Y., D. Turkington, and A. Yazdani. 2020. “Beyond the
Black Box: An Intuitive Approach to Investment Prediction
with Machine Learning.” Journal of Financial Data Science
2 (1): 61–75.
Lo, A., D. Repin, and B. Steenbarger. 2005. “Greed and Fear
in Financial Markets: A Clinical Study of Day-Traders.” NBER
Working Paper No. w11243.
López de Prado, M. 2018. “The 10 Reasons Most Machine
Learning Funds Fail.” Journal of Portfolio Management
44 (6): 120–33.
López de Prado, M. 2019. “Ten Applications of Financial
Machine Learning.” Working paper (22 September).
Lundberg, S., and S. Lee. 2017. “A Unified Approach to
Interpreting Model Predictions.” NIPS 17: Proceedings of
the 31st Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems: 4768–77.
McLean, R., and J. Pontiff. 2016. “Does Academic Research
Destroy Stock Return Predictability?” Journal of Finance
71 (1): 5–32.
Mikolov, T., W. Yih, and G. Zweig. 2013. “Linguistic
Regularities in Continuous Space Word Representations.”
Proceedings of NAACL-HLT 2013: 746–51. www.aclweb.org/
anthology/N13-1090.pdf.
Nadeem, Monisa. 2018. “Clearing the Confusion: AI vs.
Machine Learning vs. Deep Learning.” Global Tech Council
(25 November). www.globaltechcouncil.org/artificial-intelligence/clearing-the-confusion-ai-vs-machine-learning-vsdeep-learning/.
Rasekhschaffe, K., and R. Jones. 2019. “Machine Learning
for Stock Selection.” Financial Analysts Journal 75 (3):
70–88.
So, E. 2013. “A New Approach to Predicting Analyst Forecast
Errors: Do Investors Overweight Analyst Forecasts?” Journal
of Financial Economics 108 (3): 615–40.
Swinkels, L., and T. Hoogteijling. 2022. “Forecasting Stock
Crash Risk with Machine Learning.” White paper, Robeco.
Tobek, O., and M. Hronec. 2021. “Does It Pay to Follow
Anomalies Research? Machine Learning Approach with
International Evidence.” Journal of Financial Markets
56 (November).

CFA Institute Research Foundation

19

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

2. ALTERNATIVE DATA AND AI IN INVESTMENT
RESEARCH
Ingrid Tierens, PhD, CFA
Managing Director, Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research

Dan Duggan, PhD
Vice President, Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and alternative data are not new
concepts in investment research or finance. AI can be
broadly defined as using computers to mimic human problem solving. Alternative data can be broadly defined as any
data in a nonstructured format. The arrival of computers
in financial firms and the arrival of nonstructured data in
digital format meant that entrepreneurial finance professionals started to see opportunities to address financial
use cases by leveraging these tools instead of primarily
relying on the human brain, helped by pen, paper, an
abacus, or a calculator. If you define investment decision
making as trying to make objective sense of a wide spectrum of diverse data to allocate capital, the appeal of AI and
alternative data to improve investment decisions should
not come as a surprise. Although early attempts to codify
human decision making may not meet today’s definition of
AI and alternative data, because they may have been either
too ambitious or have had a marginal impact by today’s
standards, they paved the way for an innovation cycle that
is by now well under way in the financial services industry,
well past its early adoption cycle, and affecting all facets of
how financial firms conduct their business. From enhancing investment insights to constructing better portfolios,
optimizing trading decisions, streamlining client service,
reducing operational issues, better aligning products to
client needs, and extracting better business intelligence
insights, AI and alternative data are leaving their fingerprints everywhere.
Embedding AI and alternative data into the day-to-day
activities of an investment analyst is not mission impossible. It can be compared with executing a New Year’s resolution, such as learning a new language, getting in better
shape, or running your first marathon. Resolutions become
reality through commitment, persistence, and resilience.
The journey of Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research
(GIR) over the past five-plus years illustrates that you do
not need expensive “equipment” (i.e., an unlimited budget)
and an army of “coaches with name recognition” (i.e., hardto-find talent) to make a difference. Hard work by openminded people who collectively buy into the mission, bring
different components to the table, learn from each other,
and collaborate to execute on the joint mission to produce
leading-edge investment insights will lead to a noticeable
20

CFA Institute Research Foundation

impact. This chapter demonstrates that you can start small
and that investment analysts are not bystanders but play
a crucial role in making AI and alternative data part of their
lexicon and research process.

Where Can AI and Alternative
Data Be Additive? Investment
Research Use Cases
Alternative data and AI, including machine learning (ML) and
natural language processing (NLP), are not an end in and of
themselves but are additional tools in the research toolkit
to create differentiated investment insights. The key to their
use in investment research is appreciating that alternative data and AI do not define the investment thesis but,
instead, help prove or disprove it. AI and nontraditional data
can be additive across the spectrum of investment strategies, as long as the AI and data efforts are aligned with a
particular strategy. Comparing and contrasting systematic
and fundamental investment strategies can be enlightening in this regard.
At first glance, AI and alternative data sound as if they may
only provide an advantage to systematic strategies because
of their quantitative nature. Within the AI and alternative
data spectrum, however, there are many niche datasets and
techniques that may provide added value for fundamental
strategies that can successfully incorporate data and data
science expertise in their investment process. Let us take a
closer look at use cases for each strategy.
For a systematic strategy where breadth matters more than
depth, datasets and data analysis techniques need to be
applicable across many securities. Therefore, it should not
come as a surprise that systematic managers focus their
time and effort more on alternative datasets or techniques
that can be applied to a large investment universe. Factors
extracted from text have been added to many quant
investment processes, because NLP analysis can be easily
repeated across company filings, news articles, and other
documents that are available for large sets of securities.
In addition, sophisticated econometric techniques can be

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

helpful to convert individual alphas into more solid multifactor alphas and, in turn, into more robust portfolios. But even
within systematic strategies, AI and alternative data use
may differ significantly, especially when the investment
horizon is taken into account. For example, intraday news
sentiment indicators may be helpful for high-frequency
trading strategies, but relatively less value adding for an
investment professional focused on an investment horizon spanning weeks or months, even if the signals can be
applied to thousands of securities.
For a fundamental strategy where depth matters more
than breadth, a portfolio manager or analyst will go deep
into specific use cases and will put a higher premium on
precision than a systematic manager dealing with a diversified portfolio and for whom each holding has less of an
impact on performance. Moreover, niche datasets can be
more useful for fundamental analysts or portfolio managers
to complement the information set they draw from, thus
providing a fuller mosaic view. For example, consumer sentiment via social media, brick-and-mortar foot traffic, and
even consumer search trends around product cycles offer
different angles to create a more complete picture for consumer-focused sectors. And while sectors with more digital
presence—for example, retail and technology, media, and
telecommunications—were early targets for AI and alternative data applications, GIR has seen many use cases in
both single-stock and macro research that may not seem
like obvious candidates for successful AI or alternative data
use. Examples include leveraging app downloads in the
medical device space and localized market share analysis
for membership in managed care organizations or even
quarry production.

Which Alternative Data
Should I Pay Attention To?
Data Sourcing in a World of
Overwhelming Data Supply
Keeping up with the supply of alternative and big data is
a Herculean task. There is an overabundance of providers
because the barriers to entry in this space have become
very low. Providers of “traditional” data tend to be established organizations that typically offer curated datasets
and have many years of experience with data due diligence
and support. With alternative data, the onus of due diligence has shifted from the data producer more to the data
consumer. There are clear parallels with the production
and consumption of news, where the due diligence and
fact checking have similarly shifted from the news provider
more to the news consumer.

The investment needed to bring onboard vendors, ingest
data, and test the data can outweigh the benefits of a
new data source, and the licensing costs can further tip
the scale. Given how time consuming the due diligence
process can be, the data acquisition efforts within GIR
are demand driven. Research analysts as subject matter
experts in their field typically have a good idea of the type
of data that may be useful for the investment thesis they
are pursuing. While they may not have locked in a specific
data source, may not be aware of the most scalable way
to obtain the data, or may not be comfortable manipulating unstructured data, working backwards from their
use case and initial data ideas provides a good starting
point. Ideas for nontraditional data can emerge when
analysts question whether they have the full mosaic of
data to assess their thesis and whether the datasets
they have used so far continue to provide a comprehensive picture.
In addition, new data sources do not necessarily need to
offer orthogonal information but can also be value adding
if they offer legacy data in a more scalable and more timely
fashion. The questions that today’s analysts are trying to
answer are, in essence, no different from what their predecessors tried to address, such as the following: How
is a new product launch perceived by the marketplace?
What do price trends and inventories look like? How do
changing demographics affect the economy? What is different or alternative is that the analyst no longer needs to
visit stores, run in-person surveys, or pursue other manual
paths to get answers. A continually increasing amount
of relevant information is now available in digital format
on a much larger scale and in a timelier fashion or more
frequently than was the case in the past. The qualifier
“alternative” in alternative data may be a bit of a misnomer
from that perspective.
Some investment managers who are very data driven
have a separate, dedicated data-scouting effort, possibly
an extension of the team that interacts with market data
vendors and brokers to surface new and novel datasets.
GIR has not gone down that path, because it has found
that having the subject matter experts—the analysts—take
at least co-ownership of identifying relevant data sources
for their specific use cases outweighs the scalability a
data scout may bring to the table. Where research analysts often need help is in how to efficiently analyze the
relevant data, especially as datasets have become more
complex and harder to wrangle. GIR’s Data Strategy team, a
dedicated team with a more focused analytical and quantitative background, collaborates with single-stock and
macro research teams to help them achieve that objective
through its GS Data Works initiative.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

21

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Use Cases for Alternative Data at Goldman Sachs
Global Investment Research
With time and people in short supply, GIR’s Data
Strategy team cannot chase every data idea, so
it prioritizes data that can be relevant for multiple
teams or have a high probability of being used by
at least one team on an ongoing basis. Data budget
constraints obviously also play a role, especially in
a research setting where success in execution of
research ideas mostly accrues to the benefit of third
parties. Fortunately, the explosion of data includes
a diverse and abundant number of publicly available datasets that have proven useful for research
purposes when properly combined with other data
sources already being considered. Exhibit 1 provides
an overview of alternative data types used across
the Goldman Sachs research division.

but also a wide variety of information with
inherent geographical importance, such as
store locations or electric vehicle charging stations. GIR’s understanding of brick-and-mortar
retail sales is greatly enhanced by analyzing
locations of retailers and their competitors.
Similarly, leveraging public environmental
service data (e.g., location-specific landfill
capacities and lifetimes) provides a deeper
understanding of the competitive pricing landscape in the environmental services industry.
•

If the research use case has an online component, digital information can be additive.
Datasets include app downloads, online pointof-sale information, website visits, product
counts and pricing, and search trends. Example
use cases include quantifying consumer
interest (e.g., search intensity and active user
counts) to better understand user engagement
and assessing product launches or distress
situations through social media sentiment, app
downloads, and product-specific data.

•

If the research use case can be addressed by
searching through text, NLP techniques may
uncover additional insights. This category is
quite broad, covering a wide range of unstructured data, from earnings call transcripts and
company filings to tweets and blog posts.
David Kostin, the chief US equity strategist
at Goldman Sachs, publishes a quarterly S&P
500 Beige Book, which leverages NLP to identify relevant themes each earnings cycle, one
of the many research areas where NLP has
proven to be additive.

Exhibit 1. Types of Alternative
Data Used in Goldman Sachs
Research

Source: Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research.

•

22

If the research use case has a geographic
component, geospatial data may enter the
equation. Datasets comprise not only dedicated geospatial measurements, such as
mobile foot traffic data, satellite imagery, and
government population and demographic data,

CFA Institute Research Foundation

The three categories in Exhibit 1 are prone to overlap, as many datasets span multiple dimensions.
Ultimately, the combination of dimensions provides
a more complete mosaic to better answer most
research questions. GIR thus often uses more than
one category to enhance its mosaic. For example,
a company’s pricing power can be derived not only
from many product codes and prices (digital) but
potentially also from its local market share in certain geographic regions (geospatial). In addition,
commentary about the company’s pricing power
during earnings calls may be informative for a
covering analyst (NLP).

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Which Component of
an AI Effort Is the Most
Time Consuming? The
Underappreciated Power of
Doing the Data Grunt Work
Do not expect AI to provide insights if you do not understand the data you apply AI to. Data scientists will be successful only if they appreciate the nuances, strengths, and
weaknesses of the data that go into their modeling efforts.
Cases of algorithmic bias caused by algorithms trained on
biased data have made the news in areas outside investments, but that does not mean investment applications
are immune to being misguided because of data issues.
This is an area where investment professionals who may
not have data science skills but are subject matter experts
can make a real difference. It is unrealistic to expect a data
scientist to understand each investment use case, just
as it is unrealistic to expect each research analyst to be
a data science expert. However, if the two sides have an
open mind to learn from each other and iterate, tremendous
synergies and unique opportunities to expand each other’s
skill sets will surface.

already have a layer of analysis to account for data
problems, such as automated filling around missing
data, as well as more sophisticated analysis choices,
so it is important to understand the assumptions
underlying that analysis layer. Another question to
address is whether the data allow you to delve into
the dimensions that are relevant for your investment
thesis. For example, do you need style-specific
breakouts in addition to aggregated counts when you
lever Stock Keeping Unit (SKU) counts to assess the
success of a new product launch?
•

Even small datasets may be built off an analysis layer
that relies on sampling, and problems can arise from
techniques that either undersample or have inherent
selection biases built in, such as point-of-sale, satellite imagery, or mobile foot traffic trends. Point-of-sale
information that requires opt-in consumer panels may
lever discounts for products in return for data use permission, which may skew demographics beyond what
a simple reweighting can remedy. Similarly, parking
lot car counts from satellite imagery cannot measure
covered parking. Mobile foot traffic data have limited
precision in malls and other multitenant structures.
Whatever the dataset, the process of its construction
is vital to assessing its advantages and limitations to
ultimately determine its appropriateness.

Before making final decisions on sourcing a particular
dataset, trying to identify a small test case is strongly
recommended to give a good flavor of the data without
time-consuming technological or due diligence hurdles.
Again, this is where the subject matter expert can play a
pivotal role. GIR’s data strategists have witnessed more
than once that a few targeted questions from an experienced analyst during a meeting with a data provider highlighted a data shortcoming, which led to shelving the data
source. Even after onboarding a new data source, you need
to stay alert because the data may evolve over time, especially if the provider has limited experience providing data
or is unfamiliar with how the financial services industry
may use its data. Goldman Sachs has dealt with situations
where underlying inputs to the data were removed, added,
or edited. If, in addition, the data you are sourcing are
derived from underlying inputs, getting enough transparency in the algorithms used to create the derived data will
add more complexity to the task of familiarizing yourself
with the data. The following are a few important considerations depending on the type of data you are looking at.

•

For NLP and text analysis, understanding details around
the input data is also vital to interpreting results. For
example, third-party aggregators of news articles may
not be able to see paywall content, which may introduce subtle biases. If you search across multiple text
sources, are source-specific biases and trends easy to
separate and identify? Another example is sentiment
analysis. Results from Instagram will likely be different
from those from Twitter and Reddit. Breaking apart
trends and results by source can help identify issues
that could otherwise translate into misguided signals.
In addition, when NLP is used for sentiment analysis to
evaluate important themes, topics, or events, guarding
against false positive or false negative results plays
an important role and, simultaneously, provides an
opportunity for a more nuanced view. For example,
understanding the difference between a poor consumer
product, on the one hand, and consumer frustrations
at out-of-stock items or launch logistics issues, on the
other hand, will not only strengthen results but also
better inform investable decisions.

•

The bottom line is that data curation may not sound overly
exciting, but it can easily determine success or failure.
No matter how sophisticated the data analysis capabilities are, the AI effort will fail—or, possibly worse, create
wrong outputs—if the data do not receive at least as
much attention as the analysis. Again, this is not an area
that GIR outsources to a different part of the organization.
While there are parts of the chain that can potentially be

For large and complex datasets, one of the most
general questions to ask is how comprehensive the
data are. Certain data fields may have missing values,
which can bias computational estimates such as
averages and sums. Such bias has been observed in,
for example, pricing data attained via web scraping,
the practice of programmatically extracting publiclyavailable information from websites. The dataset may

CFA Institute Research Foundation

23

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

handled by teams with more of an operational background,
such as data ingestion and low-level cleaning, data curation requires the attention of the people who are familiar
enough with the business use case—that is, the combination of the subject matter research experts and the data
scientists. As a research division, GIR not only consumes
data but also produces a substantial number of proprietary
forecasts and indicators. Wearing both hats has made the
Goldman Sachs research division appreciate even more
how nontrivial it is to create trustworthy data.

Where Does Data Analysis
Come In? Looking at the
Spectrum of Analytical
Approaches
Like the data landscape, the analysis landscape has
expanded dramatically. For data analysis, GIR’s Data
Strategy team also follows a “pull” approach, as opposed
to pushing a particular analytical technique in search of a
problem to solve. The team works backwards from the use
case at hand and collaborates with research analysts on
the following questions: What are the strengths and weaknesses of approaches you have tried in the past? Are the
outcomes vastly different when you make minor changes
to your assumptions? Do outliers have a significant impact

on the results? If any of these answers is yes, it may be
time to try more sophisticated approaches that can add
robustness to the research findings.
Also like the data landscape, where data fees and required
effort are counterbalancing factors to simply load up on
more data, explainability and required effort need to be
weighed against the promises of AI. If a more straightforward approach to analyzing the data works, GIR tries to
avoid adding unnecessary complexity. For example, when
tracking inflation as a theme in earnings calls, GIR found
that simply counting mentions of inflation was a robust
proxy for a much more complex screen consisting of a
combination of nearly 200 terms. But when the situation
calls for more complex analysis, data scientists need to be
able to provide enough intuition so that research analysts
are comfortable with the outcomes.
If structured appropriately, analysis frameworks can provide a significant amount of flexibility and scalability. For
example, Exhibit 2 shows the results of an analysis of
the pricing power of US environmental service companies
based on local market dynamics. The different shades of
color indicate different spot price ranges, a proxy of pricing power. The circles indicate landfill locations scaled
to capacity. While the datasets leveraged were specific
to environmental services, the techniques are not. The
environmental data were combined with a more mature
geospatial framework that had previously answered similar

Exhibit 2. Leveraging Geospatial Analysis Applied in One Industry
to Another Industry

Landfill location, scaled to capacity
GFL

RSG

WM

WCN

other

(click to toggle)
Spot market price ($/ton)
0

20

40

60

80

100

Sources: “Americas Environmental Services: Compounding Unit Profitability amid Building Local Market Share,” published by lead equity analyst
Jerry Revich, CFA, on 6 April 2021. Analysis by Goldman Sachs Global Investment Research based on data compiled from the Waste Business
Journal, the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, the California Water Boards, and other state sources.

24

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

questions for suppliers of heavy building materials, which
was highlighted in the 2019 “AI Pioneers in Investment
Management” report by CFA Institute.29
Data science techniques have made remarkable progress,
from enabling self-driving cars to providing customized
recommendations for a variety of services and products. Use cases for data science in financial services are
expanding as well and include, for example, recommendation engines to customize dissemination of research and
further advances in trading algorithms that benefit from
vast amounts of high-frequency order and execution data.
However, many dynamics in financial markets are inherently
unstable and adaptive in nature; that is, the amount of data
that can be used for modeling and running in-sample and
out-of-sample analyses is limited. This reality puts some
limitations on how far these techniques can be pushed
from a purely investment research perspective.

to a financial institution’s bottom line, especially in cases
where new data sources come with a hefty price tag and
data science expertise is hard to find. It is helpful to keep a
broad perspective and evaluate these efforts, traditional or
nontraditional, through multiple lenses:
•

Does the approach create alpha? While this is the
question that most people would like to see a concrete
answer to, it is unlikely that a single dataset or single
analysis technique will be an alpha generator. For systematic strategies, it may be possible to backtest a
strategy with or without inclusion of the AI component
and measure the marginal alpha contribution. The
usual caveats related to backtesting apply, but those
are no different with or without AI and alternative data.

•

Does the AI effort produce unique insights in a more
timely or more precise fashion? For fundamental strategies, the direct alpha added by the AI effort may be
hard to assess. That said, quantifying the improvement along specific dimensions can be a useful exercise. For example, GIR’s nowcasting of port congestion
allowed a more real-time confirmation of the shipping
disruption Ukraine experienced during the early days
of its invasion by Russia and as the war has continued
to evolve. GIR’s distance measurements of vessels
laying high-voltage cable established estimates for
revenue-driving business at a very granular level.
GIR’s market share analyses within multiple industrial
businesses, analyzed via geo-clustering, provided the
basis for broader statements about company pricing
power. These examples also illustrate that the majority of GIR’s AI and alternative data efforts are geared
toward descriptive analyses that feed into the broader
investment thesis, as opposed to being prescriptive
analyses that directly lead to an investment recommendation. Knowing what you hope to get out of the
process can help focus the effort and suitably ground
expectations of success.

•

Does AI create scalability that saves valuable analyst
time or allows a research hypothesis to be applied
across a broader set of securities and/or applied
more frequently? A good example is NLP analysis of
earnings transcripts, where a GIR analyst can now
easily identify themes not only across the stocks in
her own coverage universe but also relative to peer
companies and assess these themes going back over
multiple years. Conversations with GIR analysts that
started as an inquiry about the use of alternative data
in some cases highlighted much lower hanging fruit,
where a more systematized approach could create
scalability that allowed the analysts to consider various scenarios that could not have been achieved
manually.

The term “AI” may also suggest that humans have no role
to play in the analysis phase. As mentioned before, humans
can add significant value by properly curating data, a necessary input for AI. Similarly, humans will add value by continuously assessing the results of algorithms. Breakpoints
in markets, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, keep illustrating that modeling efforts need to be adapted as markets
change, and humans play a critical role here. For example,
some of the Goldman Sachs proprietary “nowcasting” indicators went through that adaptation cycle soon after COVID19 became a global phenomenon, and the subject matter
experts realized how extreme outliers broke down statistical
relationships used in the creation of the indicators.
Finally, the use of NLP techniques for investment research
purposes deserves a special mention. GIR’s efforts in this
field have been geared more toward surfacing specific
content in a scalable fashion than interpreting the meaning
or sentiment of written words. Applying NLP to a use case
where the accuracy of output was essential and consistently finding through human review that the NLP output
flagged too many false positives and false negatives provided a good education on some of the boundaries of NLP
in a research setting.

How Do I Measure Success
for an AI/Alternative Data
Effort? Using a Wide Lens
Instead of a Narrow Lens
The initial hype around AI and alternative data may have
created unrealistic expectations, which, in turn, led to
demands for hard evidence that AI and alternative data add

“AI Pioneers in Investment Management” (Charlottesville, VA: CFA Institute, 2019). https://www.cfainstitute.org/-/media/documents/survey/
AI-Pioneers-in-Investment-Management.pdf.
29

CFA Institute Research Foundation

25

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

While asking for a return on the AI investment is absolutely
the right thing to do, the hurdles to justify the effort seem
somewhat unfair relative to how budgets for traditional
data sources and traditional data analysis (for which the
costs can also add up) are determined. Trying to identify
appropriate key performance indicators for an AI effort has
therefore started to make people question their broader
data efforts, wondering whether they are extracting sufficient return on investment across the entire data spectrum. This evolution is healthy and may lead to a more level
playing field for AI-focused efforts.

Where Do I Start? It Is a
Marathon, Not a Sprint
If you are embarking on your AI and alternative data journey
in a setting with people who already have years of investment expertise, hiring one or two key people who have
a data science background, have hands-on experience
digging into data, and are genuinely interested in learning
about and solving investment problems is a great starting
point. Teaming up those key hires with one or two analysts
who are interested in leveraging and analyzing more data,
have a solid use case that has staying power, and understand that you need to iterate to get to a useful result
should allow you to hit the ground running. Investment
analysts who have ideas for new data to incorporate into
their process and appreciate that properly analyzing those
data may require trial and error are great candidates to
start an organization on its path to AI and alternative data
adoption and success. The initial use cases ideally do not
depend on a complicated dataset that may take too long to
bring on board.
Having senior sponsorship from the start is important.
Those senior sponsors do not need to have familiarity with
AI and alternative data themselves but need to have an
appreciation that these approaches can be additive to the
investment process. Their role is to provide the trailblazers some room and cover to experiment and iterate, while
keeping them accountable by staying on top of (especially
the initial) use cases. Once there are specific, tangible outcomes, others can get their heads around what it means
in practice to lever alternative data and more sophisticated
techniques. At that point, momentum to expand across the
organization is created and scaling up the effort across
geographies, analyst teams, and asset classes becomes a
realistic next step.
Another question that is raised in this context is whether
the AI and alternative data effort should be centralized or
embedded in each team. As the need for having a dedicated data science expert in each team was de minimis,
GIR went for a centralized effort that can be thought of as
an extension of its research teams across the globe and
across asset classes. Its centralized approach has given
26

CFA Institute Research Foundation

GIR the benefit of connecting the dots across use cases
coming from different research teams.
Other teams in an investment organization can provide
leverage, and it is good practice to make people in engineering, legal, and compliance departments aware of
the AI and alternative data effort from Day 1, even if they
do not have an immediate role to play. As the use cases
expand, questions about data storage, firewalls, terms and
conditions, and licensing rights for use of specific data
sources will increase, which will require proper attention
from those experts. In addition, as your use cases become
more sophisticated, you may consider building additional
functionality in house as opposed to relying on a third party
to do some of the processing for you (i.e., build versus buy),
which may require a dedicated engineering focus. GIR’s own
journey has reflected that evolution, where the first years
of experience with embedding AI and alternative data provided a wealth of information on what approaches do and,
more importantly, do not work and how they can fit into the
workflow of a research analyst. GIR’s Data Strategy team
had to revisit a number of initial approaches on how to
best evolve its data ecosystem but is now in a much better
position to partner further with colleagues in engineering to
make it a reality, as opposed to having the initial enthusiasm translate into engineering effort spent on building systems that may not have been properly thought through.

Conclusion
The impact of AI and alternative data on investment
research is evolutionary, not revolutionary. Goldman Sachs
looks at nonstructured, alternative, and big data as other
components in the spectrum of data that may be relevant
to its research process. It looks at AI, ML, and NLP as other
components in the spectrum of analytical tools to make
sense of the data. With the lines between traditional and
alternative data becoming blurred and an increasingly
ambiguous definition of what AI does or does not include,
GIR does not draw artificial boundaries across these spectrums and therefore does not assess the value of AI and
alternative data differently from its other data and analytical efforts. It draws from the types of data and the types of
analyses as needed, often mixing unstructured data with
traditional data and having more sophisticated approaches
live side by side with more intuitive approaches. Subject
matter and data science experts team up as appropriate,
while ensuring they draw the best of man plus machine
to minimize algorithmic and data biases. As this space
matures further and the lines blur even more, Goldman
Sachs expects that this integrated, iterative, and collaborative approach will continue to bear fruit for its investment
research use cases. And because it also expects that AI
and alternative data will simply become part and parcel of
the research process, there may be a day when the labels
“big” and “alternative” are no longer relevant!

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

3. DATA SCIENCE FOR ACTIVE AND LONG-TERM
FUNDAMENTAL INVESTING
Kai Cui, PhD
Managing Director, Head of Equity Data Science, Neuberger Berman

Jonathan Shahrabani
Managing Director, Chief Operating Officer – Global Research Strategies, Neuberger Berman
Large-scale alternative data (alt-data) and data science
are improving the investment techniques in the industry.
Active asset managers with a long-term orientation particularly, given their long-term mindset and the resulting
lower portfolio turnover, have differentiating opportunities to innovate in data science and big data. Therefore,
sustainable, long-shelf-life data insights are as important as (if not more important than) short-term insights
related to potential mispricing and time-sensitive
advantages.

Long-term fundamental investors in active asset
management strategies started embracing alt-data and
data science two or three years later than their hedge fund
peers. For example, data science has been an increasingly
important capability of Neuberger Berman since 2017
across sectors, geographies, and asset classes.
Alt-data allow asset managers to “bear-hug” companies by
enhancing our understanding of their operations and organizations independent of and incremental to information

Data Science Integration at Neuberger Berman
At Neuberger Berman, the data science function is
deeply integrated and provides significant added
value in its practices managing global equity mandates for institutional, retail, and high-net-worth
investors. Idea generation is the combined effort
and responsibility of both fundamental industry
analysts and data scientists.

of the company’s real-time operational metrics
and/or risk toward our long-term growth targets.

Given the vast alternative data footprint that is
continuously being created by companies, the
teams use research templates and data science
processes—including data science–integrated
scalable financial models, data modeling, and analytical tools—extensively to systematically capture
and synthesize this information.

If a template is not relevant for a given industry or
company (or a deep dive is required), fundamental
industry analysts and data scientists partner on a
custom analysis. As can be expected, custom analyses require extensive collaboration between both
parties. For certain industries, such as health care,
the background of the fundamental industry analyst
takes on increasing importance because of the vast
differences between subsectors (biotechnology,
pharmaceuticals, life sciences, etc.).

The design and construction of these research
templates are a collaboration between both
fundamental industry analysts and data scientists.
These templates capture the key performance
indicators (KPIs) for a given industry and key thesis
metrics and data insights for a given company
that are material to its longer-term earnings power.
Simultaneously, with curated long-term fundamental
support, we actively construct and track a spectrum
of alt-data metrics to glean a comprehensive view

Both fundamental industry analysts and data
scientists review these data on at least a weekly
basis and discuss any notable upward or downward movements.

During year-end reviews, fundamental industry
analysts and data scientists are evaluated based
on their contributions from multiple perspectives,
including, but not limited to, investment performance, engagement, and strategy innovations
and development. These are important drivers of
incentives for both parties.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

27

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

gleaned from financial statements and management
interactions. The depth and breadth of alternative data,
if analyzed and integrated correctly, can generate invaluable insights with a longer shelf life for long-term alpha
generation.

The Operating Model and
Evolution of Data Science
Integration
There is no single best operating model for data science
integration that fits all active asset managers. Data science
must be customized to fit into each firm’s own unique
culture, organizational structure, core value proposition,
strategic prioritization, and even innovative budgeting
methods.

Evolution of the Data
Science Organization
In this section, we discuss the decision of whether to
use a centralized or decentralized data science team and
how to evaluate the return on investment of data science
initiatives.

To Centralize or Not
While a highly centralized data science team may enjoy
more autonomy than decentralized teams and serve well
as an innovation hub or research lab, if detached from
investment decision making and business opportunities,
it tends to fail to drive sustainable innovation that can be
integrated or provide incremental value to the core investment platform.30 In contrast, a completely decentralized
data science team can prove economically inefficient and
risk duplication of effort, especially when data scientists
are less experienced.
The level of data science integration among strategies
varies, and we can distinguish three stages of data science
integration/engagement with investment teams even within
the same firm: (1) engagement to establish credibility, (2)
active and deep integration for investment evaluation, and
(3) data science as part of the core investment strategy.
The level of centralization depends on the stage of data
science integration. Generally, the data science team is
centralized in the early to intermediate stages of development. When best practices are established and experience
grows, experienced data scientists can make a more direct
impact as part of an investment team’s decision-making

processes. The transition will happen faster as more data
scientists and analysts are developed with training in both
data science and fundamental investing.

Evaluating Data Science Initiatives’
Return on Investment
While it is important that all data science initiatives start
with illustrating incremental added value and establishing
good engagement relationships with fundamental industry
analysts, rapid “time to market” and the early establishment
of credibility and process momentum on the road to subsequent stages are essential as well. Notably and importantly,
the KPIs for team performance and return on investment
(ROI) assessment could be different when planning and prioritizing engagement/integration efforts in different stages
of data science and investment process integration.
For example, driving data source coverage, metrics and
insights coverage, and the number of high-quality use
cases are essential in the early stage to establish credibility. When coming to more active and deeper integration, data science teams need to align performance KPIs
with the measurement of investment decision-making
impacts and contribution to investment performance.
Furthermore, if data science is part of a core investment
strategy and/or is driving innovative investment solutions for investors and prospects, additional KPIs and ROI
measurements on contribution to strategic development,
growth in assets under management, and client engagement are also important, in addition to the contribution to
investment performance. Over time, data science efforts
evolve with the growing capabilities of team members
and the closer partnership with fundamental industry
analysts, and we continue to enable the data science
team for long-term success focusing on deeper integration into both investment decision making and innovative
investment solutions.
ROI assessment of data insights and data sources also
needs to be customized to the investment styles of
active asset managers while taking into account such
factors as investment capacity, which is as important
as investment performance for innovative data science–integrated investment solutions. For example, altdata may have proven to generate incremental alpha in
sector-focused, cross-sectional systematic strategies,
but a data science platform supporting more diversified
signals and types of strategies needs further development to support diversified client demands, global
exposure, and thus the larger-scale investment capacity
requirement needed by a large global asset manager
with a long-term orientation.

For more discussion on centralization, see CFA Institute, “T-Shaped Teams: Organizing to Adopt AI and Big Data at Investment Firms”
(2021, p. 23). www.cfainstitute.org/-/media/documents/article/industry-research/t-shaped-teams.pdf.
30

28

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Analysts with Training
in Both Data Science
and Investments
At the 1997 Worldwide Developer Conference, Steve Jobs
was asked “to express in clear terms how, say, Java, in
any of its incarnations, expresses the ideas embodied in
OpenDoc.” His answer was to start with the key business
question of how to best serve customers rather than
“sitting down with engineers and figuring out what
awesome technologies we have and how we are going to
market that.”31
Data scientists often have similar questions for their
fundamental investing counterparts, such as, Are the
vast amounts of new metrics generated from new data
sources and data science techniques fully understood
and appreciated by fundamental investment professionals
to realize their full potential? The correct answer is also
similar: Data science endeavors should start with key
investment questions rather than what data and metrics
data scientists have already built and how to figure out use
cases out of them.
A large portion of the data created daily proves of limited
value to data scientists in evaluating investment opportunities. In contrast, we focus on data insights into key
controversies and thesis metrics that allow us to have an
informed and, often, differentiated view on a company’s
earnings power relative to market expectations three to
five years out.
To this end, data scientists on the team (including some
with a prior background as fundamental industry analysts)
have been trained internally for both data science and
fundamental research skills.32 This training ensures data
scientists have a strong knowledge to initiate meaningful
discussions of investment use cases in multiple industries,
as well as the key drivers of earnings power. Inevitably,
some mistakes have been made along the way, but they
created opportunities for data scientists and fundamental analysts to learn to speak the same language and
strengthen their bond.
Data scientists with a background and training in fundamental investing have a better chance of cutting through
conflicting and noisy data. For example, a high number of
open job listings for a given company’s salesforce provides
a better indication of business momentum in some industries than in others. However, it can also mean employee
retention is low and signal underlying issues for an

organization. Understanding the nuances of each company
and its peers (competitive positioning, geographic footprint, merger and acquisition strategy, etc.) is critical.
Armed with their alternative data findings, data scientists
and fundamental industry analysts are able to engage
company executives on a deeper level, provide additional
insights into the inner workings of the company under
study, and enrich our insights into an investee organization.
It is our experience that analyzing data in isolation and
without context can lead to erroneous conclusions.

Longer-Term Earnings Power
Insights vs. Shorter-Term
Operational Monitoring
Integrating alt-data into the fundamental investing framework allows investment teams to have an informed and,
often, differentiated view on a portfolio company’s earnings
power three to five years out. At the same time, actively
constructing and tracking a spectrum of short-term altdata metrics to develop a comprehensive view of real-time
operational metrics and/or risk toward our longer-term
growth targets are equally important.
For example, many investment management firms have
access to some form of credit card data. Indeed, there are
many third-party providers in the marketplace that scrub
this type of data for subscribers and provide an easily
digestible format in real time. On the surface, credit card
data in raw form and slightly lagged delivery provide less
of a timeliness advantage. However, these data may allow
data scientists working with long-term investment teams
to perform in-depth proprietary research that is better
aligned with their core investment disciplines.
Although many large, publicly traded companies are heavily researched and alt-data coverage is not universally
and equally distributed, it is still possible, with balanced
longer-term earning power insights and shorter-term operational metrics monitoring, to have a differentiated view
about earnings power relative to market consensus. A few
specific examples will help illustrate this point.

An Athleisure Brand
A working, fundamental thesis postulated that the operating margin of a leading athleisure brand was at an
inflection point, driven by growth in the company’s digital
offering. Presented with this thesis, the data science team

For a transcript and video of the remarks by Steve Jobs, see, e.g., Sebastiaan van der Lans, “Transcript: Steve Jobs at Apple’s WWDC 1997,”
Sebastiaan van der Lans—On WordPress, Blockchain, Timestamps & Trust (blog, 3 January 2020). https://sebastiaans.blog/steve-jobswwdc-1997/.
31

For a related discussion on the evolution of investment and data science function integrations, see CFA Institute, “T-Shaped Teams.”

32

CFA Institute Research Foundation

29

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

recommended a proprietary analysis breaking down the
average selling price (ASP) between the company’s digital
and brick-and-mortar transactions. The fundamental industry analyst agreed with the data science team that such
an analysis would be highly valuable, particularly because
the management team of the company in question provided minimal disclosure regarding its digital offerings. The
results of the analysis showed a significant premium for
an extended period of time on digital transactions versus
brick-and-mortar transactions.
Taking it one step further, the fundamental industry analyst
later proposed tracking and monitoring the ASPs of the
company under review versus a major competitor as further
validation of the thesis. Indeed, the ASP premium achieved
by the company in digital transactions over this major
competitor was materially higher over a similar period of
time. This analysis contributed to our portfolio management
team’s initiation of an investment position in the stock,
supported by our increasing confidence that the operating
margins of the company could expand meaningfully above
consensus expectations over the medium term and long
term. At the same time, because the company was one of
the best covered names by alt-data sources, an array of
metrics was actively monitored to glean a comprehensive
view of the company’s operations, including digital app
engagement, consumer interests in various product lines,
pricing power, and geographic new initiatives.

A Global Luxury Brand
A fundamental industry analyst began to lose conviction
when recommending a well-known global luxury company because of the Chinese government’s emphasis on
“common prosperity.” The growth of the luxury industry in
recent years has been dominated by Chinese consumers.
As a way to cut across the debate, given the analyst’s view
that the impact of a government initiative might not be
easily spotted in conventional data, the data science team
captured multiple operational KPIs.
Although we did see a modest dip in some short-term data
metrics, such as social media momentum, we performed
an extensive analysis of the company’s customer base over
a comprehensive period of time, which was more indicative of the company’s ability to contribute to our long-term
growth targets. Specifically, our analysis revealed that
many months after the government’s “common prosperity”

30

CFA Institute Research Foundation

push, the company’s largest cohort of customers (female
midlevel wage earners) increased their spending as a
percentage of disposable income at this brand. Such an
approach ultimately allowed our portfolio management
teams to maintain ownership in the stock based on unobvious alt-data metrics that our data science team turned into
an investible insight.

A Leading Asset Manager
A fundamental working thesis held that many investors
were underestimating the growth of a new retail product
offered by a leading asset manager. In addition to tracking
regular asset flow data provided by the company, our fundamental industry analyst colleagues and the data science
team developed an alternative method for tracking and
monitoring traffic in the new product on the web portal of
this specific retailer. This analysis contributed to our portfolio management teams’ initiation of a position in the stock,
bolstered by increased confidence in its earnings power
and potential for upside growth.
Later, our ongoing tracking and monitoring of the data
allowed our portfolio management team to play defense
when necessary. Specifically, a sharp drop-off in web portal
traffic observed by our data science team ultimately led to
a more cautious outlook by our fundamental industry analyst and portfolio management teams. This, in turn, resulted
in our portfolio management team’s reduction (and in some
cases elimination) of its position in the stock.

Conclusion
Data science and alternative data can help provide insights
and added value to a range of investment processes, strategies, and portfolio management teams. However, there
exists no single, self-evident methodology or road map to
follow. Rather—and critically—distinct investment strategies, investment horizons, and portfolio teams each require
their own individual approaches to the use of data science
and the range of alternative datasets they can leverage.
The winning formula, in our opinion, is a partnership-driven
approach that brings together data scientists, fundamental
analysts, and portfolio managers with value-added
datasets specifically built to address the firm’s specific
investment needs.

HANDBOOK OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AND BIG DATA APPLICATIONS IN
INVESTMENTS

II. NATURAL LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING,
PROCESSING, AND GENERATION:
INVESTMENT APPLICATIONS

This book can be found at cfainstitute.org/ai-and-big-data

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

4. UNLOCKING INSIGHTS AND OPPORTUNITIES
WITH NLP IN ASSET MANAGEMENT
Andrew Chin
Head of Quantitative Research and Chief Data Scientist, AllianceBernstein

Yuyu Fan
Senior Data Scientist, AllianceBernstein

Che Guan
Senior Data Scientist, AllianceBernstein

Introduction
A confluence of events is affecting the asset management
industry, forcing industry participants to rethink their competitive positioning and evolve to survive in the new world
order. Geopolitical, regulatory, technological, and social trends
are upending long-held norms, and the status quo is likely an
untenable option for many firms. These forces are creating a
host of challenges for existing players and presenting new
opportunities for emerging firms. We discuss some of the key
challenges affecting the active management industry in this
new environment. While our list is not meant to be exhaustive,
we focus on the main trends that will drive the adoption of
text mining techniques in the coming years. We also provide
the motivation for firms to leverage natural language processing (NLP) to capitalize on these trends.

Low Expected Returns
The driving focus for many investors since the Global
Financial Crisis (GFC) has been the search for returns.
Bond yields collapsed following the GFC, and concerns
about economic growth suppressed expectations around
equity returns. With prospects for returns expected to be
much lower versus historical norms, asset owners and
asset managers widened their search for high-yielding
and high-returning assets. At the end of 2021, US 10-year
government yields hovered near all-time lows, at 1.5%, and
the price-to-earnings ratio of the S&P 500 Index was at
25, higher than historical averages. Although inflationary
concerns caused a rise in rates and a significant drawdown in equity markets over the first nine months of 2022,
below-average yields and above-average equity valuations
persist across many countries, implying that future returns
will likely be on the low end of long-term trends.
Over the past decade, investors are increasingly taking on
more risk in an effort to enhance returns. Private markets
and structured products are becoming more popular in the
asset allocations of many investors. While these historically
32

CFA Institute Research Foundation

niche areas are becoming more mainstream, the investment,
operational, and counterparty risks associated with them may
still not be fully understood. Nevertheless, the low expected
returns in the current environment are pushing asset
managers to find new sources of returns and differentiation.

Active Managers Have Struggled
While investors are searching for higher returns, active managers, overall, have not delivered on their promises. Over the
past decade, active managers have underperformed their
respective benchmarks. Exhibit 1 shows the percentage of
US large-cap equity managers outperforming the broad US
market as measured by the Russell 1000 Index. During any
given year since the GFC, about one-third of the managers
have beaten their benchmarks, suggesting that over longer
horizons, even fewer managers are consistently beating the
markets and providing value for their clients.
As a result of these struggles, management fees have collapsed, and significant assets have moved from high-fee,
active to low-fee, passive strategies. Specifically, index products at the largest asset managers have swelled over the
past decade, adding further to the headwinds for active management. One only needs to witness the enormous growth
of such popular products as the SPDR S&P 500 ETF Trust
(SPY) or the Vanguard 500 Index ETF (VOO) to gauge investor
preferences. Many believe that these trends are set to persist
unless active managers can reverse their recent headwinds.

Big Data and Data Science Present
Opportunities
Given these challenges, asset managers are looking
to provide higher and more consistent returns for their
clients. For long-only managers, market returns dominate
total portfolio returns; most of these managers have a
beta close to 1 against their benchmark, and as a result,
portfolio returns will largely mimic the returns of the
broader market. Managers may look outside their stated
© 2023 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 1. Percentage of Funds Outperforming the Russell 1000 Index,
2003–2021
61

50%

48

48

48

45
40

43

41

41

40

37

34

32
29

28
20

21

19

19

2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Source: Bank of America.

benchmarks to enhance their returns. For example, equity
managers may include IPOs (initial public offerings) and
SPACs (special purpose acquisition companies) to potentially increase returns, while bond managers may include
securitized instruments or other higher-yielding assets to
enhance performance. All these strategies look “outside the
benchmark” for investment opportunities and attempt to
enhance the total returns of the portfolios.
Managers look to provide a consistent edge above and
beyond the broad markets by attempting to uncover differentiated insights around potential investments. They
endeavor to gain a deeper understanding of their investments, giving them more confidence in the companies or
the securities they are interested in. Examples include a
consumer analyst having a better sense of customer preferences for a certain brand or a tech analyst being able to
forecast the technology stack favored by companies in the
future. Other examples may include a systematic process
that leverages unique data sources or uses sophisticated
algorithms to synthesize data. These insights can give organizations the confidence they need to bolster their convictions and deliver stronger performance for their clients.
To do this, portfolio managers are increasingly turning to
new data sources and more sophisticated techniques to
provide the edge they need to survive.

Alternative Data
Traditional data normally refers to structured data that
managers have been consuming for decades. These data
can easily be shown in a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet in

two dimensions: Typically, time is used as one dimension,
and some market or company variable is used as the other
dimension. Over the past decade, new data sources have
emerged to complement the traditional data sources. The
four “Vs” in Exhibit 2 can be used to describe the “bigness”
of the new data. Volume refers to the exponential growth in
the amount of data available. Velocity describes the speed at
which data are produced and consumed. Variety describes
the range of data types and sources. Finally, the fourth V,
veracity, is critical because having more data is not necessarily useful unless the data are verifiable and deemed to be
accurate. The data collected on smartphones illustrate the
4 Vs. Data are being created constantly on smartphones as
users’ apps track their various activities (volume). These data
may come in text, audio, or video formats (variety). As messages and notifications are received, the user may interact
with or respond to the prompts (velocity). For these data to be
useful, phone manufacturers and app developers create algorithms to cleanse, store, and enrich the data (veracity). These
forces are playing out across all sectors of the economy.
Asset managers have had success in collecting and incorporating these new data into their investment processes.
Initial use cases include summarizing customer reviews
and comments on social media and other platforms. For
example, when Starbucks introduced its new rewards
program in February 2016, many customers took to Twitter
to protest the changes. Exhibit 3 shows that there were
significantly more “angry” and “dislike” tweets after the
initial announcement and even following the rollout about
one month later. Portfolio managers holding Starbucks in
their portfolios could have used these trends to study the
potential impact of the loyalty program changes before
CFA Institute Research Foundation

33

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 2. The Four Vs of Alternative Data
VOLUME

VELOCITY

VARIETY

VERACITY

Amount of data

Speed at which data
are produced

Range of data types
and sources

Truth or accuracy
of data

Exhibit 3. Tweets Relating to “Starbucks Rewards,” 1 February 2016–25
April 2016
# of Tweets
20,000
18,000
16,000
Rollout of changes

14,000
12,000

Initial announcement
of changes

10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000

1-Feb-16
3-Feb-16
5-Feb-16
7-Feb-16
9-Feb-16
11-Feb-16
13-Feb-16
15-Feb-16
17-Feb-16
19-Feb-16
21-Feb-16
23-Feb-16
25-Feb-16
27-Feb-16
29-Feb-16
2-Mar-16
4-Mar-16
6-Mar-16
8-Mar-16
10-Mar-16
12-Mar-16
14-Mar-16
16-Mar-16
18-Mar-16
20-Mar-16
22-Mar-16
24-Mar-16
26-Mar-16
28-Mar-16
30-Mar-16
1-Apr-16
3-Apr-16
5-Apr-16
7-Apr-16
9-Apr-16
11-Apr-16
13-Apr-16
15-Apr-16
17-Apr-16
19-Apr-16
21-Apr-16
23-Apr-16
25-Apr-16

0

Positive

Neutral

Angry

Dislike

Source: AllianceBernstein.

the company officially reported the financial impact, likely
in April 2016 to cover Q1 2016 performance. Reading and
summarizing the sentiment of the tweets can give asset
managers an early indication of the impact of the rewards
program changes. In this case, Exhibit 3 suggests that the
negative tweets had largely disappeared in April, and thus,
the changes were unlikely to have a significant impact on
Starbucks’ financial performance.
34

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Other applications with Twitter include measuring voting
intentions during elections and monitoring product rollouts and advertising campaigns. Beyond Twitter, product
review sites and message boards may be useful for customer feedback on brands and trends. In many of these
early use cases, ingesting, cleansing, and interpreting
text data were key ingredients to success. Specifically,
measuring sentiment and intentions across thousands

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

and millions of textual data requires sophisticated tools.
This area is well suited for NLP.
With the evolving geopolitical and regulatory risks, companies are also looking to new data sources from governments. News and tweets can provide real-time insights
into government policies and priorities, while public data
sources containing infrastructure projects, shipping routes,
energy consumption, enforcement actions, health data, and
government spending can influence investment decisions
across asset classes. Asset managers are increasingly
leveraging these new datasets to enrich their understanding of the world and their impact on financial markets.

Artificial Intelligence and NLP
Artificial intelligence (AI) is the study of emulating human
understanding and reaction to various situations. Machine
learning (ML) is a branch of AI focused on machines learning to think by training on data. NLP is a specific form of
ML that focuses on understanding and interpreting textual
and spoken data. It uses linguistics, computer science, and
statistics to create models that can understand text and
respond to text.
NLP is a natural tool for the asset management industry
because many activities of asset managers are driven
by text data. Indeed, many of the alternative data trends
require NLP capabilities to fully leverage their potential.
Before we discuss the applications of NLP in finance, an
examination of NLP’s successes and challenges in other
industries can yield some insights into the evolution and
adoption of these tools in our industry.

NLP Evolution and
Applications
NLP research started prior to the 1950s, but the Turing
test, developed by Alan Turing in 1950, was one of the
first attempts to emulate human language understanding
(Turing 1950, p. 457). It tests a machine’s ability to “exhibit
intelligent behavior” indistinguishable from humans.
Initially, most of the algorithms to process language were
based on predefined rules.
With the development of faster machines and the introduction of WordNet and the Penn Tree Bank in the 1980s,
NLP gained prominence among researchers in computer
science and in linguistics. More recently, language models
incorporating neural networks, such as word2vec, allowed
a vast cadre of researchers to train NLP models across
different domains.
Recent NLP research relies on underlying language
models to process text. A language model is a probability

distribution over sequences of words. These probabilities
are typically generated by training the language model on
text corpora, including books, articles, news, and other
forms of written text. Traditional language models include
n-gram and recurrent neural network (RNN) models.
An n-gram model is a type of probabilistic model that predicts the most probable word following a sequence of n
words. Since training corpora are typically limited, there
may be many n-grams with zero probability (combinations
of words that have never been seen before), especially as
n increases. To overcome this scarcity issue, word vectors
and mathematical functions can be used to capture history
from text sequences and are commonly used in RNN
language models.
Later implementations of RNNs use word embeddings to
capture words and their positions in sequential text. These
features allow RNNs to process text of varying lengths
and retain longer word histories and their importance. The
introduction of long short-term memory (Hochreiter and
Schmidhuber 1997) in the 1990s further improved on traditional RNNs with additional capabilities to maintain information over long periods of time.
While RNNs form the backbone of many language models,
there are limitations. Specifically, since text is processed
sequentially, it is time consuming to train and apply these
models. Moreover, when sequences are exceptionally long,
RNN models may forget the contents of distant positions
in sequences. Attention mechanisms (Vaswani, Shazeer,
Parmar, Uszkoreit, Jones, Gomez, Kaiser, and Polosukhin
2017) are commonly used to overcome this memory issue
by capturing word positioning and relevance regardless
of their location in sequences and allowing the neural
network models to focus on the most valuable parts of
the sequences. Based on attention mechanisms, transformer-based models were introduced in 2017; they vastly
improved the performance of language models across
various tasks. Some of the most well-known transformers
include the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers or BERT (Devlin, Chang, Lee, and Toutanova
2018), Google’s T5 (Raffel, Shazeer, Roberts, Lee, Narang,
Matena, Zhou, Li, and Liu 2020), and OpenAI’s GPT3 (Brown,
Mann, Ryder, Subbiah, Kaplan, Dhariwal, Neelakantan,
Shyam, Sastry, Askell, et al. 2020).
The parameters in modern NLP models are typically
initialized through pretraining. This process starts with
a base model, initializes the weights randomly, and
trains the model from scratch on large corpora. To adjust
a pretrained model for specific problems and domains,
researchers fine-tune their models by further training them
on the desired domain and making small adjustments to
the underlying model to achieve the desired output or
performance. Fine-tuning is a form of transfer learning
where model parameters are adjusted for a specific task.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

35

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

NLP models have been applied successfully in a variety
of settings and already play important roles in our
everyday lives.
Spam detection is one of the most important and practical
applications of machine learning. Spam messages usually
contain eye-catching words, such as “free,” “win,” “winner,”
“cash,” or “prize,” and tend to have words written in all
capital letters or use a lot of exclamation marks. Language
models can be fine-tuned to search for these common
spam features to identify unwanted messages. Another
popular approach for spam detection leverages supervised
learning and the naive Bayes algorithm by first annotating
messages as either “spam” or “not spam” and then training a model to learn from the annotations to classify new
messages.
NLP models use part-of-speech tagging techniques that
identify the nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, and so on
in a given a sentence. These methods enable the language
models to fully understand and interpret the text.
Topic modeling using such techniques as latent Dirichlet
allocation, or LDA (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003), have been
applied extensively to extract key themes and topics in a
series of sentences or texts and thus provide the ability to
summarize documents quickly.
As noted earlier, data have exploded in terms of volume,
velocity, and variety. Social media platforms, online forums,
and company websites provide a plethora of text-based
datasets that are waiting to be mined. Sentiment analysis
can be used to analyze how different segments of the population view certain products, events, policies, and so on.
Machine language translation can be modeled as a
sequence-to-sequence learning problem—that is, a sentence in the source language and another sequence
returned in the translated target language. RNNs can be
used to encode the meaning of the input sentence and
decode the model calculations to produce the output.
Not long ago, voice user interfaces (VUIs) were in the realm
of science fiction, but voice-enabled agents are becoming
commonplace on our phones, computers, and cars. Indeed,
many people may not even be aware that NLP provides the
foundation for these systems. Under the hood, audio sound
waves from voice are converted into language texts using
ML algorithms and probabilistic models. The resulting text
is then synthesized by the underlying language models
to determine the meaning before formulating a response.
Finally, the response text is converted back into understandable speech with ML tools.
One of the most exciting innovations in VUIs today is
conversational AI technology. One can now carry on a conversation with a cloud-based system that incorporates
well-tuned speech recognition, synthesis, and generation
into one system or device. Examples include Apple’s Siri,
36

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Microsoft’s Cortana, Google Home, and Amazon’s Alexa.
The home assistant devices in this category are quite
flexible. In addition to running a search or providing the
weather, these devices can interface with other userlinked devices on the internet to provide more comprehensive responses. Finally, these technologies leverage
cloud-based tools for speech recognition and synthesis
to integrate conversational AI into many aspects of our
everyday lives.
The goal behind a question answering (QA) system is
to respond to a user’s question by directly extracting
information from passages or combinations of words
within documents, conversations, and online searches.
Almost all the state-of-the-art QA systems are built on
top of pretrained language models, such as BERT (Liu,
Ott, Goyal, Du, Joshi, Chen, Levy, Lewis, Zettlemoyer, and
Stoyanov 2019; Joshi, Chen, Liu, Weld, Zettlemoyer, and
Levy 2020; Rajpurkar, Zhang, Lopyrev, and Liang 2016).
Compared with systems that require users to scan an
entire document, QA systems are more efficient because
they attempt to narrow down answers quickly. Nowadays,
QA systems are the foundation of chatbots, and some QA
systems have extended beyond text to pictures. In some
respects, QA systems can be viewed as the most generic
of all the NLP solutions because the input questions can
include translations, key topics, part-of-speech tags, or
sentiment analysis.

NLP in Finance and Asset
Management
In this section, we discuss how NLP is used in finance and
asset management.

Decision-Making Framework
Given the success of NLP in solving a wide swath of problems, we now discuss its applications in finance. We start
with the basic decision-making framework because it
directly addresses the challenges that lead organizations
toward NLP. Exhibit 4 describes the broad actions we normally take to make decisions, regardless of whether those
decisions are in finance or in everyday life. As we will see,
this framework informs where NLP can be impactful.
•

Gather data: Investors want to have a comprehensive
view of all the data that may affect their decisions.
Analysts collect financial information as well as competitor, supplier, and customer data. These data can
come in many forms; alternative data sources have
expanded the breadth of available data on potential
investments. Whereas before, analysts would gauge
real-time buying trends by visiting physical stores,
they can now see more comprehensive data through
geolocation or footfall data. This type of data is more

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 4. Traditional Decision-Making Framework
Gather Data

Extract Insights

comprehensive because it covers many locations
rather than just a hand-picked few and it tracks the
trends consistently rather than for a subset of hours
over a week. Ultimately, investors collect and monitor
as much data as they can for their decision-making
process.
•

Extract insights: With reams of data at their fingertips, investors need to decide how to synthesize the
data to make informed decisions. Doing so normally
involves two steps: (1) determining what the data are
saying and (2) deciding how to weigh each of the data
points in the eventual answer.

Financial data and figures are relatively easy to interpret.
Trends and other statistics can be calculated from the data
to predict future performance. It is much more difficult to
interpret nonfinancial data. For example, interpreting a written customer review on a website may be difficult because
the source and intention of the review are both unclear.
Even if we assume the review is objective and without bias,
does it contain new and useful information? We normally
overcome these issues by using the law of large numbers:
By collecting sufficiently large sample sizes, we hope to
dilute the effects of outliers and biases.
Once interpretations are extrapolated, weighing the data
in the context of all the other data surrounding a potential investment is paramount. In the absence of empirical
evidence, investors may use heuristics; they may assign
higher weights to more recent data or data that they
believe are more reliable or predictive. Asset managers tend
to emphasize data that have been predictive in the past
or somehow correlated with historical outcomes. These
heuristics can be extremely helpful, but investors may
have behavioral biases that could lead them to suboptimal
results. For example, they may be biased by their connection to the CEO of a company, or they may not remember
the full earnings report from last year to adequately compare the current results.
ML can overcome these issues by systematically learning
from the data and monitoring the outcomes. It can be used
to help weigh the data to ensure biases are mitigated and
predictions are robust. Our use cases later in the article will
explain these ideas in more detail.
Once the data are synthesized, investors can make
their decisions using their decision-making framework.

Take Actions

Monitor Outcomes

By monitoring the outcomes (i.e., the accuracy of
predictions or the impact of recommended actions),
investors can then feed these new data back into the
decision-making framework to improve future decisions.
This iterative feedback mechanism is critical for ongoing
success. ML models are trained by data and humans, so by
incorporating feedback on the success or failure of the predictions, these same models can be improved. We believe
this is a significant benefit of ML models. They can be
trained to learn from new data and past decisions, whereas
humans may be slower (or unable) to adapt to new data or
incorporate failures into the decision-making framework.
NLP has a natural place in this decision-making framework
because it offers a systematic approach to scan a broad
set of documents and leverages ML techniques to extract
insights. Reading, understanding, and synthesizing multiple
documents accurately and efficiently offer clear benefits for
NLP approaches.

Common NLP Tasks
We now discuss some of the common tasks relating to NLP
in finance. Many of these applications were discussed in
the prior section, but we will include additional comments
on their uses in our industry.

Summarization
News aggregators use this technique to summarize long
articles to send digestible content to inboxes. We may
also wish to summarize corporate filings or presentations
for quick consumption. The key challenge with this task
is understanding and capturing the key relevant points of
the large document. This challenge is made more difficult
because different investors may weigh the content of
the text differently, and as a result, the optimal summary
depends on the user or usage.

Topic extraction
The key themes and topics in an article can be extracted
using supervised, semi-supervised, or unsupervised methods. In the supervised approach, the model is trained to
look for specific keywords related to a predefined theme,
whereas the unsupervised approach attempts to infer the
themes being discussed. The semi-supervised approach

CFA Institute Research Foundation

37

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

is a hybrid approach in which seed words can be used
as starting points to identify themes. One example is in
the context of central bank statements. Common themes
debated during central bank meetings in the United States
include inflation and growth. We may seed the topic modeling process with these words and then apply various
language techniques to find new words and phrases
resembling these themes to derive the final topics from
the documents.

Search/information retrieval
We may be interested in looking for specific terms or references from the text. Examples may include competitor or
product references in a document. An analyst for Apple may
be interested in finding all references to the iPhone in corporate documents or news articles.

Question answering
Similar to the search task, we are interested in finding
information in a document. However, the QA task is focused
on answering specific questions rather than returning
references to those questions. In the previous example
regarding the Apple analyst, he may be interested in the
actual iPhone units sold rather than simply references to
the phone. Another example may be extracting the interest rate or the covenants in a loan document. A specific
application of this question answering task is the chat box,
where specific and relevant responses are needed to reply
to questions.

Sentiment analysis
Should the text be viewed positively or negatively? This
will again depend on the user and application. For example,
certain words, such as “debit,” “liability,” and “resolve,” may
have different meanings depending on the context. The
first two terms are normally viewed as negative words in
common parlance but tend to be more neutral in a financial
setting since they are common terms in financial statements. “Resolve” may be viewed as positive in most settings, but “did not resolve” should be viewed as negative.

Named entity recognition
Extracting entity names from text is a common but important task. Entities include countries, organizations, companies, individuals, places, and products. By identifying
the entities in a document, investors can link the article
to other information on the entities and thereby create a
comprehensive view before making decisions. Client interactions are no different: Determining client-relevant text is
critical to a complete understanding of a client. While this
type of data is critical, the problem is difficult; for example,
separating articles regarding the technology company
Apple and the fruit apple is not trivial.
38

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Typical NLP Pipeline
With these applications in mind, we discuss the infrastructure required to incorporate NLP at scale. The NLP pipeline
depicted in Exhibit 5 presents a high-level overview of the
key components in NLP analysis that mainly handle text
inputs. Note that the original data need to be converted
to machine readable text. For example, speech to text is
required for audio and video sources. The original data
can come from a variety of external and internal sources,
such as corporate statements, central bank statements,
news, social media, web content, internal documents, and
video/audio meeting transcriptions. A data lake is typically
needed to handle large amounts of input data. Depending
on the size, structure, and usage of the data, they can
be stored in different types of databases. Data with clear
structure or schema can typically be stored using SQL
relational databases. Unstructured data can be stored
in nonrelational databases, such as MongoDB. Today,
graph databases are becoming more popular in handling
exceptionally large sets of structured, semistructured, or
unstructured data.
The NLP engine shown in Exhibit 5 depicts the tools for
text processing and is composed of two components.
The first part focuses on processing raw text. Different
use cases require different preprocessing procedures.
For example, “case handling” refers to the conversion of
all characters to uppercase/lowercase. This process is
nuanced because “us” can refer to the United States if
written in uppercase or the pronoun “us” if lowercase is
used. In addition, while the removal of irregular punctuation and characters from formal documents, such as
corporate filings, may be warranted, some characters
may carry valuable information in other domains, such as
emojis in social media data. Expansion/contraction refers
to the process of expanding contractions into separate
words, such as replacing “isn’t” with “is not.” This procedure will affect the final list of tokenized words (the result
of splitting text into smaller units). Stop words, such as
“the,” “a,” and “is,” are not informative and are typically
removed to reduce the size of the vocabulary. Depending
on the application, stemming or lemmatization may be
applied to reduce words to their root or stem forms. In the
tokenization procedure, text in a document can be broken
down into sentences, and these sentences can be further
split into words or subwords. In some situations, subwords
may be more robust when dealing with rare words.
The second part of the NLP engine contains tools to process and transform the cleansed text into usable information that can be consumed by the end applications or
users. For example, we can analyze a sentence by splitting
it into its parts and describing the syntactic roles of the
various pieces. Named entity recognition is a commonly
used parsing technique to identify persons, locations,
and organizations from the text. Text vectorization—using

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 5. NLP Pipeline
corporate statements

news

web content

audio transcripts

central bank statements

social media

internal documents

video transcripts

Text Data

Raw Text/String Preprocessing
case handling

punctuation

special characters

stop words

stemming

lemmatization

expansion/contraction
tokenization

subword
word
sentence

NLP Engine
Toolkit/Application
parsing

part of speech tagging
constituency parsing
dependency parsing
named entity recognition

text classification

Application

text vectorization

topic modeling

text similarity

information extraction

question answering

text generation

investment signals

vectors to represent text—is commonly used for feature
engineering. Popular techniques for text vectorization
include one-hot encoding, term frequency–inverse document frequency (TF–IDF), word embeddings using word2vec (Mikolov, Chen, Corrado, and Dean 2013) and GloVe
(Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014), and word/sentence embeddings with deep learning language models.
As an example, representing documents through bag-ofwords approaches using one-hot encoding allows us to
compute statistics describing the words in the document.
These statistics can be enhanced to carry more information by assigning weights to the various words using such
methods as TF–IDF. Word embeddings using word2vec or
GloVe allow us to represent individual words using numerical vectors. Deep learning language models, such as BERT
and GPT-3, can represent words and sentences using
numerical vectors containing rich contextual information, such as positioning within sentences. These models
are very efficient and powerful and have a wide range of
applications.
Asset managers should modularize their tools to leverage
these tools on diverse types of documents. For example,
text summarization tools should be abstracted so they can

actionable insights

dashboards

be used for news articles, corporate filings, and internal
emails. By modularizing the code, the various NLP techniques can be applied broadly across different types of
documents. Depending on the size of the data and the
specific algorithms used, different infrastructure may be
needed. For example, to create sentence embeddings from
many documents, a single GPU (graphics processing unit)
processor can be substantially faster than parallelizing
multiple CPUs (central processing units). For even larger
corpora, such as global news articles, large clusters of
machines may be needed to create deep learning models.
The output from the NLP engine can be consumed in different ways. For example, the NLP signals can be used directly
to prompt an investment action or as part of a broader
strategy. There may also be value in showing the results
in a dashboard where users can interact with the original
documents and the output. This transparency gives the
users confidence in the signals because they can easily
review the results on their own. In addition, asset managers
may leverage these dashboards to solicit feedback from
their users to improve their algorithms. One idea may be to
give users the ability to highlight certain text and annotate
the sentiment of the text to further fine-tune their models.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

39

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

NLP Applications in Asset
Management
In this section, we examine several applications of NLP in
the asset management industry.

Deciphering Sentiment in Social
Media Posts
Let us start with a simple example of applying NLP to social
media posts to track sentiment. When the iPhone X was
launched in late 2017, there were questions about its
adoption and success. Investors and analysts turned to
social media posts and reviews to gauge the sentiment of
the iPhone X, as well as its competitors, during the rollout.
Investors were interested in understanding the features
consumers valued in smartphones and whether the iPhone
X’s new features (Face ID, lack of a home button, etc.) were
resonating with consumers.
One common approach to this question was to scrape
smartphone reviews among various websites to assess
consumer feedback. A simple word cloud, such as the one
shown in Exhibit 6, is a quick way to uncover the key topics
and themes.
The larger words represent the most frequently used
words in the reviews. While some words are meaningless
(“much” and “use”) or expected (“Apple”), it may have been
reassuring to see that “Face ID” was being highlighted and

such words as “amazing” and “love” were being used to
describe the new phone.
Investors can also analyze the sentiment across the
reviews to gauge consumer feedback on the various
smartphone models. VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and
sEntiment Reasoner) is well suited for this purpose given
its ability to measure polarity and intensity of social media
posts (Hutto and Gilbert 2014). Exhibit 7 shows a snapshot
of the reviews soon after the iPhone X was introduced.
While most of the consumers were “neutral” on the new
phone, it seemed that the iPhone X was lagging its predecessors in terms of positive reviews.
Investors may have also wanted to determine the features
that were most prevalent in reviews to assess the appeal
of the iPhone X’s new features since those enhancements
were likely going to drive adoption. This analysis typically
requires the determination of the key features differentiating the phones (system, screen, battery, price, etc.) and
the creation of a list of keywords used to describe those
features. For example, such terms as “iOS” and “Android” are
associated with the “system” feature. Exhibit 8 suggests
that the new features in the iPhone X were leading to many
positive reviews.
This simple example illustrates the basics of NLP
analysis. Once the raw data from social media posts and
customer reviews are ingested, simple tools can be used
to analyze the data to provide insights into investment
controversies. In late 2017, investors were assessing the launch of the iPhone X, and by monitoring and

Exhibit 6. Word Cloud for iPhone X Reviews

Source: AllianceBernstein.

40

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 7. Consumer Sentiment by Phone
Galaxy
iPhone 6S
iPhone 7
iPhone 8
iPhone X
Moto
Pixel
50%

0%
Positive

Neutral

100%
Negative

Source: AllianceBernstein.

Exhibit 8. Percentage of Feature Mentions in Positive Reviews
Galaxy
iPhone 6S
iPhone 7
iPhone 8
iPhone X
Moto
Pixel
50%

0%
System

Design

Battery

Screen

Hardware

100%
Camera

Sound

Price

New Features

Source: AllianceBernstein.

aggregating the social media posts, they were likely able
to discern the positive adoption of the new features and
thus conclude that the new phone was likely to achieve
the success of the prior models.

figures from these documents. Exhibit 9 highlights some of
the key tasks when dealing with large documents.

Extracting Themes to Highlight
Important Topics and Trends

Topic modeling can streamline the analysis of large documents by identifying and extracting the key topics or
themes in the data. The evolution of these topics from the
corpora may also provide insight into the importance of the
themes over time.

Our industry deals with vast amounts of documents. Often,
analysts are tasked with synthesizing and summarizing
enormous documents or extracting important sections or

In the following example, the BERTopic package
(Grootendorst 2022) is used to generate topic representations by converting each document to its embedded
CFA Institute Research Foundation

41

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 9. Synthesizing Large Documents
Topic Modeling

Search/Question Answering

Summary

representation, clustering the documents, and then
extracting keywords to represent the derived themes.
We applied BERTopic to about 260,000 Apple headlines
from October 2019 to September 2022 to extract the top
topics from the text. Since the topics were generated
programmatically, we inferred the true themes for each of
the topics from the generated keywords and used them
as labels in Exhibit 10. For example, we created a theme

called “Stock Market” because the important keywords for
the topic are “sp,” “500,” “nasdaq,” and “dow.” Similarly, the
“Covid” theme has references to “infection,” “contact,” and
“tracing.” Deciphering intuitive and interpretable themes
from the BERTopic output is a crucial step when using topic
modeling tools.
The topics we inferred from the Apple news articles
(“Apps,” “Covid,” “Inflation Concerns,” “Stock Market,” and

Exhibit 10. Top Five Topics from Apple News Articles,
October 2019–September 2022
300

Frequency

250
200
150
100
50

08-19
09-19
10-19
11-19
12-19
01-20
02-20
03-20
04-20
05-20
06-20
07-20
08-20
09-20
10-20
11-20
12-20
01-21
02-21
03-21
04-21
05-21
06-21
07-21
08-21
09-21
10-21
11-21
12-21
01-22
02-22
03-22
04-22
05-22
06-22
07-22
08-22
09-22
10-22

0

Date
Apps
Source: AllianceBernstein.

42

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Covid

Inflationary Concerns

Stock Market

Competitors

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

“Competitors”) are intuitive and distinct. Note that “Covid”
was unsurprisingly the key topic in the first half of 2020,
but its importance has waned since then. Instead, inflationary concerns are dominating more recent Apple news
headlines. Exhibit 11 provides the sample code to extract
key themes from text.
Topic modeling is particularly powerful in uncovering the
key themes or ideas across a set of documents. It can
also be used to explain the evolution of topics over time
to understand their importance in a specific area. In the

Apple example, investors can extract the key themes and
the associated keywords from market news to drive their
research and perspective on the company. In another
example, we applied topic modeling on central bank
statements to uncover the emphasis of the Federal Open
Market Committee (FOMC) on its two goals—price stability
and sustained economic growth. By parsing central bank
statements, we could assess the FOMC’s trade-off between
these two goals to gain insights into their policies at
upcoming meetings.

Exhibit 11. Sample Code: Extracting Key Themes

CFA Institute Research Foundation

43

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Searching for Key Themes and
Question Answering
While topic modeling can provide a good overview of a set
of documents, investors may be interested in extracting
relevant sections or targeted data points from specific
documents. We provide an example of these tasks using
environmental, social, and governance (ESG) documents.
Because ESG-oriented strategies have become more
mainstream, asset managers are looking for ways to
assess ESG-related activities in their investment companies and to monitor their progress toward their goals.
Corporate and social responsibility (CSR) reports are used
by companies to communicate their ESG efforts and their
impact on the environment and community. These reports
describe the company’s relations with its full range of
stakeholders: employees, customers, communities,

suppliers, governments, and shareholders. Though corporations are currently not mandated to publish CSR reports
annually, more than 90% of the companies in the S&P 500
Index did so for 2019.
In the following example shown in Exhibit 12, we parse
sentences from a CSR report in the automotive industry
and leverage a semantic search model that uses predefined keywords to rank and select parsed sentences.
This example searches for sentences related to “GHG
[greenhouse gas] Emissions.” We embed this phrase into a
vector and use it to compare against the embedded representation of the document text. Our example uses only one
comparison sentence (“text” variable in the sample code
below) for simplicity, but we can apply the same process
for multiple candidate sentences, sort similarity scores
across all of them, and then select the most similar ones
from the process.

Exhibit 12. Sample Code: Searching for ESG Themes in a CSR Report

44

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Theme searches can direct researchers to relevant
sections of the text quickly, thus simplifying the process
to extract insights from documents. One caveat is that
semantic searches initially start as unsupervised learning processes and may need to be enhanced by creating
classification models based on labeled feedback. These
resulting supervised learning models ensure important
sections are not missed during the search process. Indeed,
creating a comprehensive list of keywords and fine-tuning
the model on annotated search results are common methods to minimize false negatives (incorrectly labeling a
section as not important).
While finding relevant and related text improves both the
efficiency and effectiveness of researchers, more direct
approaches to narrow down the answers to queries may

be even more impactful. Question answering is designed
for exactly this purpose. The goal of QA is to build systems
that automatically extract answers from a given corpus
for questions posed by humans in a natural language. In
the following example in Exhibit 13, we feed the question
“What is the goal by 2035?” and a representative passage
from a CSR report into the RoBERTa model (Liu et al. 2019),
an optimized model leveraging BERT. The model can extract
the exact answer from the passage—“source 100% renewable energy globally”—thus directly answering the original
question. In real-life examples, passages and documents
are much longer but the same approach can be used to
find the best answer to the question.
These techniques have broad applications across the asset
management industry; research analysts, risk managers,

Exhibit 13. Sample Code: Question Answering for ESG Metrics

CFA Institute Research Foundation

45

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

compliance officers, and operations staff are constantly
scouring documents for key figures and specific items
within documents. Examples include financial statement
analysis, ESG monitoring, regulatory reporting, and fund
prospectus reviews. While these tools can be extremely
powerful, they need careful calibration and fine-tuning
before they can be used widely across the financial services industry. In our experience, creating a step to extract
relevant sections before the QA process, as in the prior use
case, is essential to success. This step ensures that the
appropriate sections of the document are being searched
for the answers.

Uncovering Risks in Corporate
Filings
We now delve further into the actual text and language
used in documents to uncover insights for investment
research. We scan corporate filings for potential risks using
text mining techniques. Since the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) requires publicly traded companies
to file reports disclosing their financial condition, investors can parse these reports for significant disclosures,
changes, and trends.
In an influential paper, Cohen, Malloy, and Nguyen (2019)
found that significant changes in sequential 10-Ks convey
negative information on future firm performance. Since
10-K filings are typically long and complicated, leveraging NLP techniques to extract information systematically
can greatly improve the comparison of year-over-year
(YOY) changes. Cohen et al. used several bag-of-words
approaches to measure document changes, including
the cosine similarity between vectors representing the
documents. The following example in Exhibit 14 leverages doc2vec (a generalized version of word2vec that
represents whole documents as vectors) to model the
changes of the management discussion and analysis
(MD&A) section in 10-K forms.
Corporate filings, including 10-Ks, can be scraped from the
SEC’s websites. Text from the MD&A section is extracted
and doc2vec is used to represent the text in each of the
filings. Specifically, the words in the MD&A sections are
represented by numerical vectors using the doc2vec algorithm. To gauge YOY changes, we compute the cosine similarity of the two vectors representing the sequential filings.
High cosine similarity suggests the text from the two filings
is largely the same, whereas low cosine similarity suggests
substantial differences in the underlying reports.
A typical long–short backtest can be used to determine the
predictive efficacy of this NLP feature. Exhibit 15 shows the
performance of a monthly-rebalanced long–short strategy,
with the long side representing the companies with the
most similar YOY filings and the short side containing the
companies with the most dissimilar filings. The backtest
46

CFA Institute Research Foundation

shows compelling results throughout the study period, with
the strongest results in more recent years. Our results suggest that simple calculations using vectorized representations of documents can uncover risks and opportunities from
corporate filings. The NLP process in this example “reads” the
documents and looks for differences in the text, emulating
the tasks commonly performed by research analysts.

Broadening Insights on Earnings
Call Transcripts
Earnings calls provide forums for companies to convey
important financial and business information to the investment community and the public. Human analysts scour individual calls for insights into company operations, but doing
so systematically across a wide swath of companies can be
time consuming and error prone. NLP tools can be leveraged
efficiently and effectively to address these issues.
Earnings calls typically consist of a presentation section and
a question-and-answer (Q&A) section. Company executives
are the sole participants in the first section, whereas both
corporate executives and analysts from the investment
community interact during the Q&A section. Investment signals can be mined on the different sections and the different
types of speakers—namely, CEOs, other executives, and analysts—to study potential differences among them.
A variety of NLP approaches can be used to generate investment signals from earnings call transcripts.
Bag-of-words approaches using predefined dictionaries and context-driven language models are common
techniques. We describe three categories of features
in our analysis of the transcripts—document attributes,
readability scores, and sentiment scores.
Document attributes refer to features derived from the characteristics of the call. Examples include the number of words,
sentences, questions, and analyst participants in a call.
Readability scores use a variety of methods to assess the
difficulty of the text and document. These metrics tend to
focus on two areas: the use of difficult-to-understand words
and the length of sentences. Easily understood messages
(texts with low readability scores) may be quickly incorporated into market prices and will therefore have a negligible
impact on potential mispricing. Complex messages (texts
with high readability scores) may be used by company executives to obfuscate bad news or less-than-stellar results.
Sentiment scores can be derived from the underlying
text using different formulations. The most basic method
to assess sentiment is to count the number of positive
and negative words based on a specific dictionary, such
as Harvard IV-4, VADER (Hutto and Gilbert 2014), and
Loughran–McDonald (Loughran and McDonald 2011). This
approach, commonly called bag of words or dictionary

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 14. Sample Code: Determining Changes in Corporate Filings

based, is intuitive and interpretable, but it has limitations.
For example, it cannot handle negation or words that may
have different meanings in different settings. Contextdriven language models can overcome the issues of dictionary-based approaches. With the development of advanced
algorithms and improvements in computational power,

transformer-based models, such as BERT, have proven to be
effective in encoding and decoding the semantic and syntactic information of natural languages. The sample code
in Exhibit 16 uses FinBERT (Huang, Wang, and Yang, forthcoming), a BERT-based model pretrained on financial text, to
score sentiment on a series of input sentences.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

47

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 15. Performance of
Similarity Score on US Large-Cap
Companies, 2004–2019
1.7
1.6

Growth of a Dollar

1.5
1.4
1.3

1.1
1.0
2012
Year

2014

2016

2018

Source: AllianceBernstein.

We assess the ability of our features to differentiate
between outperforming and underperforming stocks using
a monthly rebalanced strategy. At the beginning of each
month, we form portfolios based on the available features
as of that date and track the difference in subsequent
returns between the top and bottom quintiles over the following month. Exhibit 17 shows a histogram of information
ratios (IRs) for various features on US large-cap companies
over the period 2010–2021. Approximately 20% of the IRs
in our research are greater than 0.5 for the US companies,
suggesting there is promise in the features. We found similarly encouraging results for features created in other stock
and bond universes.
We now analyze the differences between dictionary-based
and context-driven approaches to derive sentiment.
Conceptually, the context around words should be an
important driver when assessing sentiment. While “grow”
may typically be viewed as positive, “competitors growing” or
“economic headwinds growing” should be scored negatively.
Exhibit 18 shows the dollar growth of the strategies based
on representative sentiment scores generated through
these two approaches. The context-driven approach based
on BERT has performed better recently, suggesting that it
has been able to better discern sentiment in financial text.
Additionally, there has been evidence suggesting company
executives are adapting to the rise of machines listening
to their comments by changing the words they use in their
communications. In other words, company executives may
be choosing their words carefully since they know NLP
techniques are being used to analyze their comments. Thus,
dictionary-based approaches may not be as useful going
48

These high-level results suggest that the generated NLP
signals from earnings call transcripts may be useful for
portfolio managers. Applications include the usage of these
signals in systematic strategies or to complement fundamental processes. Additionally, similar techniques can be
applied to other types of corporate filings and statements
to extract insights from those documents. These tools give
investors the ability to analyze large amounts of documents methodically and potentially save them from doing
the work manually.

Deepening Client Insights
to Prioritize Sales Efforts

1.2

0.9
2004 2006 2008 2010

forward, and context-driven approaches may be more robust
in overcoming these behavioral changes.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

With continued economic and market uncertainty, sales
teams need to quickly digest and synthesize client information and updates to assess their needs. We can leverage
NLP to help these sales teams deepen client insights and
prioritize sales efforts using publicly available data.
The data sources include client presentations, quarterly/
annual reports, meeting minutes, announcements, and
news. It is time consuming for any sales team to monitor
all the media outlets for information across a broad set of
prospects and clients. NLP techniques can be leveraged
to collect, process, and synthesize the data and alert the
sales team with timely and actionable prompts.
Exhibit 19 illustrates this process. First, public data can
be obtained through web scraping. For example, data
scraping pipelines can be built to detect document
changes on various websites. We can also monitor major
news outlets to track mentions of specific keywords,
such as names of organizations, themes, and topics. The
scraped data are populated into a database before being
fed into the NLP engine. Based on the specific use case,
the NLP engine (more details are shown in Exhibit 5) aims
to further prepare the data and applies the applicable
algorithms to extract the relevant information. As a final
step, notifications and prompts are sent to the sales team
for further action.
In summary, using NLP to effectively process and synthesize information can inform and improve sales outreach by
surfacing timely alerts and relevant intelligence from publicly available data sources.

Identifying Entities within
Documents
Across many of the use cases discussed above, entity
names and identifiers need to be extracted from the text to
tie the documents back to specific people or organizations.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 16. Sample Code: Extracting Sentiment from Text

Named entity recognition refers to the task of identifying
the entities (person, place, country, company, financial
instrument, etc.) within documents. Exhibit 20 provides a
simple example using spaCy to identify the various entities
in a news title.

Successfully Leveraging NLP
While our use cases demonstrate that significant advances
have been made, NLP is still relatively new in finance. We
discuss the key technical and business challenges next.

Overcoming Technical Challenges
Broadly, technical challenges, such as breaking down
sentences and tagging the parts of speech within sentences, are common across all NLP applications. Linguists

and computer scientists are researching and creating new
insights to improve on these capabilities, especially across
different languages.
Context-specific tools for the financial services industry
are being developed. Dictionaries are extremely useful and
improve language understanding, especially for specialized
domains. One complexity lies in robust dictionaries across
different languages. We found that a simple translation of
the Loughran–McDonald dictionary to Chinese is not robust
because some words do not carry the same meanings in
Chinese and there are additional Chinese words that are
more meaningful for Chinese investors.
Even context-specific language models, such as BERT,
will need to learn from new financial domains. While
FinBERT-type models have been trained on financial text,
further training and fine-tuning is likely required to improve
CFA Institute Research Foundation

49

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 17. Number of NLP Features across Different Information Ratio Levels
Number of
Features
70

Strong

Very Strong

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6
0.8
Information Ratio

1.0

1.2

1.4

Source: AllianceBernstein.

Exhibit 18. Performance of Context-Driven vs. Dictionary-Based Approaches,
2010–2021
Growth of $1
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20

Dictionary Approach

1

1

-0
20
21

01

20
–0
20

19
-

1
20

1

-0
20
18

20
17
-0

01
16
20

1

-0
1
15
20

-0

01

20
14

13
-

1
20

01

-0
20
12

1120

20
10
-0
1

–

Context-Driven Approach

Source: AllianceBernstein.
performance in specialized areas, such as securitized
assets, regulatory filings, fund disclosures, and economic
forecasts. In securitized assets, for example, such common
English words as “pool” and “tranche” have vastly different
meanings, and language models will need to be trained
with these new words before machines can systematically
understand and synthesize text as humans do.
50

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Named entity recognition (NER) is an important task in
finance. Even though we provided a simple example among
our use cases to apply spaCy’s NER model on written text,
the model is not perfect. For example, spaCy’s model incorrectly tags companies with names containing common
English words. For example, numerous articles containing the words “state” or “street” may be classified under

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 19. Overview of Process to Deepen Client Insights
Web scraping

NLP processing

Parsing
Websites
News sources

Database

Store extracted
information

NLP engine

Output

Data preprocessing

Notifications

Information extraction

Dashboard

Feedback

Exhibit 20. Sample Code: Identifying Entities within Documents

the company “State Street.” These limitations encourage
researchers to further fine-tune and improve their NER
models. One approach is to leverage threshold-based
matching techniques to achieve the desired accuracy.
By increasing the threshold to accept matches using NLPbased similarity metrics, we can improve the accuracy of
the models. However, this increased accuracy comes at a
cost: We may have more false negatives because our model
may be less forgiving of misspellings and short names. As a
result, researchers should assess the trade-offs between
false positives and false negatives in their applications.
Another approach to improve NER involves applying additional code to the results from the spaCy model. This
allows more flexibility for researchers to customize their
requirements and insights for identifying entities. This
approach may be helpful to deal with the difficulties in

identifying such companies as AT&T, where its ticker (T)
and acronyms are quite common in normal language usage.

Overcoming Business Challenges
On top of these technical challenges, various business
issues slow or hinder the adoption of NLP across asset
managers. In our view, the biggest hurdle is data—data
quality and accessibility. Until recently, data had not been
viewed as an asset, and as a result, the quality of data is
varied and in many cases, unknown. We see many companies creating data organizations to tackle these issues,
with the emergence of the chief data officer as an important executive and driver of business prioritization.
With the appropriate focus and resourcing, firms can
leverage data as an asset, feeding data into dashboards
CFA Institute Research Foundation

51

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

and models that ultimately help with faster and better
decision making. This is particularly true for NLP pipelines
and tools because the existing policies around these data
are likely nonexistent, which presents an opportunity
for organizations to design governance processes from
scratch. In addition, firms will need to be nimble in their
governance and policies because of the nascent and
evolving regulatory frameworks; regulators are struggling
to keep up with the breadth and complexity of data and the
uses of data across commercial platforms, but we expect
improved guidance in the future.
Data accessibility is also a big hurdle: Data scientists face
challenges in finding and ingesting the required data for
analysis and modeling. With regard to external data, asset
managers can choose to create their own datasets or partner with vendors. Our view is that the most innovative and
impactful data sources will be harder to obtain, and as a
result, asset managers will need to develop their own pipelines to ingest these data. This may involve web scraping
and capturing various forms of communication (html, different text file formats, audio, and video). Fortunately, many
open-source tools exist to handle these situations.
As datasets become widely used and commoditized,
vendor solutions are likely feasible and cost effective.
For example, about 10 years ago, asset owners creating
NLP signals from corporate filings, such as 10Ks and 10Qs,
and earnings call transcripts developed pipelines to scrape,
clean, and ingest the documents directly from the SEC’s
EDGAR website. Today, various vendors offer data solutions
that significantly simplify the pipelines to leverage corporate filings. Another example is ESG data: Currently, there
is little consistency in ESG metrics, standards, reporting
formats, and disclosure frequencies. This means that asset
managers are developing bespoke NLP pipelines to process
the various documents and metrics on company websites,
disclosures, and presentations. Over time, requirements will
evolve because we expect this space to consolidate considerably over the next few years and vendors will emerge
to develop solutions around ESG data collection, analysis,
and reporting.

Transforming Culture
An organization’s culture may be another important hurdle
in its transformation. Organizations aspire to learn, innovate, and adapt, but cultural norms and human behavior
can sometimes impede progress. We see this repeatedly
across the industry.
Successful portfolio managers at all organizations typically have successful track records and significant assets
under management from clients who have bought into their
capabilities. Although these portfolio managers strive to
outperform and deliver for their clients, one clear tendency
is for teams to continue doing what has been successful.
52

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Investment teams operate on clearly articulated investment philosophies that have been honed over many
years. They apply these philosophies using disciplined
investment processes to uncover insights and opportunities. These structures have brought the team historical
success, so changing or overriding these processes
will be extremely difficult. This is the challenge that new
data sources and more advanced techniques, such as
NLP, face—overcoming the entrenched mindset that may
come with historical success. This issue is compounded
because clients expect investment teams to continue with
processes that have worked and brought them success.
However, with the financial markets, competitors, data
sources, and investment tools changing rapidly, successful
teams will need to evolve to survive.
To help organizations in their transformation, data scientists should leverage techniques to augment rather than
replace existing processes, which is best achieved through
pilot projects focused on real problems. Projects should be
driven by investment controversies, sales opportunities, or
operational gaps. By partnering with the decision makers,
data scientists can achieve shared outcomes that are
valued by all parties, thus ensuring adoption and success.
NLP projects focused on addressing inefficiencies, such as
gathering data, updating tables, and systematically making
data more accessible, can deliver value and encourage
adoption. Our use cases discussed in the earlier sections
are examples where we have seen success because they
address existing gaps that can be addressed through data
science techniques.
Once investors, sales teams, and operations functions
understand the value and capabilities of data science, they
will be more open to further exploration. For example, once
the investment teams have access to the corporate filings
on a common platform (such as a dashboard), it is natural
to extend the capabilities to synthesize the documents.
Sentiment analysis and topic extraction are examples of
common extensions once the data are in place. Indeed,
to ensure adoption and success, asset managers should
engage with end users to implement these ideas. We
find that summarization, topic modeling, and question
answering projects have the highest probability of success
because they address common inefficiencies or manual
processes.
Asset managers may see opportunities to leverage NLP
to achieve efficiencies in operational processes. Indeed,
as we discussed in our use cases, our techniques can be
applied across various parts of the organization. While this
may be low-hanging fruit, cultural norms and mindsets may
make it difficult for innovative ideas to be adopted quickly.
Employees may be concerned about their roles and livelihood when new technology is introduced: What is their place
once the new techniques are incorporated? What incentive
do they have to adopt the new technologies and potentially

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

eliminate the need for their roles? As a result, asset managers need to assess cultural barriers when trading off the
operational savings versus the likelihood of success.

Developing Clear Success Metrics

more functions in asset management organizations as
three trends take hold: (1) availability of and improvements
in open-source models, training data, tools, and vendor
options, (2) fine-tuned models with proprietary insights,
and (3) development of non-English capabilities.

Companies of all stripes are intrigued by the potential of
new data, new techniques, and new technologies in their
organizations. However, it is important to define clear success metrics on these new initiatives. For organizations
starting their exploration, modest goals are likely appropriate. For example, getting one investment team to adopt
and thus champion the successes may be a realistic and
achievable goal. For more advanced organizations, developing common infrastructure and tools while nurturing
talent may be the appropriate goals. In all cases, however,
we suggest organizations take long-term views on their
projects and articulate short-term milestones that create
awareness, maximize adoption, and develop competencies.

Improved Tools

Attracting and Developing Talent

Asset managers are also exploring the use of audio and
visual cues to augment the text-driven features we have
discussed. By combining the tonal variations of spoken
text, the facial and bodily expressions of the speakers,
and the actual text used, researchers hope to have a more
comprehensive understanding of the intended communication. Indeed, in our day-to-day interactions, we incorporate
all these elements (tone, delivery, body language, and content) to discern the message and its nuances. Interestingly,
techniques such as the ones discussed in this chapter
can be extended to capture audio and visual features. For
example, different aspects of the audio message can be
embedded using BERT-type models, and these embeddings
can be compared and manipulated to tease out changes in
emotions and reactions.

There will be a talent gap. Existing employees may not
possess the required data science or NLP skills, so companies will need to hire external talent. Creating a “Center
of Excellence” that aims to raise the capabilities across
the organization is one way to bridge the talent gap. While
exact structures may differ from firm to firm, we believe it is
important to have a dedicated centralized team that keeps
abreast of industry developments, creates new capabilities, shares best practices, builds common infrastructure,
and develops talent. Achieving these outcomes will be
maximized with a centralized team with the mandate to
raise the competencies of the entire organization.
This central hub acts as a critical link among all the teams
in the organization, ensuring that the latest insights and
capabilities are shared broadly. With this core team in place,
organizations now have different approaches to build out
their data science capabilities. On the one hand, augmenting
the centralized team with embedded data scientists within
business functions ensures that there is domain expertise
and the business units are accountable for the success
of the teams. On the other hand, consolidating all the data
scientists in one centralized team ensures there are efficiencies and few overlaps on projects, but the researchers
may be more removed from the end users. Ultimately, the
optimal structure will depend on the organization’s existing
norms, culture, and goals, but having a Center of Excellence
is essential to long-term success.

The Road Ahead
NLP has tremendous potential in asset management. Our
use cases highlight existing areas where NLP is already
having an impact. We expect growing adoption across

Even though there were over 70,000 models and counting
as of late 2022 on Hugging Face (a popular NLP platform),
we expect to see continuous innovation in training and
fine-tuning techniques. Models will be trained for specific
tasks, thus improving their performance across various
activities. For example, customized BERT models may be
developed for different fixed-income sectors, such as collateralized loan obligations, mortgages, private credit, and
municipal bonds, among others. Semantic improvements
will also be made, as machines are taught to further understand the nuances of language.

We have seen an explosion in the breadth of vendor offerings to solve specific NLP tasks in investment, compliance,
and operational activities. Specifically, document processing such as that in our use cases on theme searches
and question answering is becoming more mainstream.
Vendors have developed customized solutions for specific
applications across the industry (ESG documents, regulatory filings, shareholder documents, etc.). While customized
solutions are the natural starting points, we expect more
consolidation to occur and more generalized and robust
solutions in the future. For example, QA techniques will be
more powerful and able to handle diverse types of questions across different documents. To draw an analogy from
another domain, the Google search engine has evolved over
time and is now able to handle specific queries rather than
simply return generalized results. Searching for the “score
from yesterday’s Yankees game” returns the actual score
rather than links to the team website or a list of baseball
scores. We expect these capabilities to materialize for the
asset management industry, giving researchers the ability
to answer specific questions and synthesize ideas quickly.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

53

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Proprietary Models

Language Expansion

We have seen various instances of asset owners injecting
their own insights into language models to improve the
base models. There are two common approaches—proprietary dictionaries and proprietary phrase annotations. As
discussed earlier, various public dictionaries exist to score
sentiment on sentences and documents. Having said that,
investment teams can create custom dictionaries to score
documents based on their own preferences, thereby tailoring the NLP algorithms for their specific use cases. This
customization enables asset managers to synthesize documents using their own views and insights and build trust
in the underlying algorithms.

Finally, we expect to see substantial progress in the development and advancement of non-English language models.
While many of the NLP developments started with English
documents, there has been both academic and practitioner
interest in other languages. Specifically, as firms look for an
edge in NLP, one fruitful path may be using documents in
local languages rather than using the translated English versions. Local documents may reveal tone and semantic references that are discernible only in the original language.

Beyond customized dictionaries, investment teams can
also label or annotate words, phrases, and sentences
to improve language models, such as BERT. Our own
research suggests language models can be more accurate on sentiment classification and other NLP tasks with
feedback from human annotators. The following two sentences are from a telecom company that FinBERT scores
as positive.

As NLP tools mature in the asset management industry,
organizations will be able to apply these tools to a wide
range of problems. We are already seeing early successes
in investments, distribution, and operations, and we expect
this momentum to continue. As decision makers become
more comfortable with the new tools and models, adoption
will accelerate and efficiency gains will accrue quickly.
Over time, with appropriate engagement and training by
humans, the NLP tools will become more transparent and
effective and users will readily incorporate these tools into
their arsenal.

Sentence 1: “It does seem as though your competitors
are healthfully ramping up their efforts to try and improve
service quality.”
Sentence 2: “Churn in handsets remains below 0.9%, but it
sure looks like it was up a lot year over year.”
From a sentiment perspective, we view these sentences
as negative when the broader context is considered. In the
first sentence, a company’s competitors performing better
is typically negative for the company, but FinBERT focuses
on the “ramping up” and “improve service quality” to determine its positive sentiment.
As for the second sentence, higher “churn” for a telecom
company should be viewed as a negative even though
such models as FinBERT normally view “up a lot year over
year” as positive. These examples illustrate the need for
language models to be further trained on specific domains
for them to be effective.
By manually labeling these sentences and using them to
fine-tune FinBERT, we found marked improvement in the
model’s performance. We expect more firms to use manual
annotations to improve the base models and to engender
more trust in the models.
While we largely used the investment arena for our discussion on proprietary dictionaries and phrases, the same
concepts can be leveraged in other parts of the organization. Sales teams can customize NLP tools for their client
outreach using the same methods to optimize client interactions and sales effectiveness.

54

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Conclusion

Ultimately, these NLP tools improve our decision making,
and that alone should ensure their adoption and success.

References
Blei, David M., Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. 2003.
“Latent Dirichlet Allocation.” Journal of Machine Learning
Research 3: 993–1022.
Brown, Tom B., Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah,
Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav
Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. “Language
Models Are Few-Shot Learners.” Cornell University,
arXiv:2005.14165 (22 July).
Cohen, Lauren, Christopher J. Malloy, and Quoc Nguyen.
2019. “Lazy Prices.” Academic Research Colloquium for
Financial Planning and Related Disciplines (7 March).
Devlin, Jacob, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova. 2018. “BERT: Pre-Training of Deep Bidirectional
Transformers for Language Understanding.” Cornell
University, arXiv:1810.04805 (11 October).
Grootendorst, M. 2022. “BERTopic: Neural Topic Modeling
with a Class-Based TF-IDF Procedure.” Cornell University,
arXiv:2203.05794 (11 March).
Hochreiter, Sepp, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. 1997. “Long
Short-Term Memory.” Neural Computation 9 (8): 1735–80.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Huang, Allen, Hui Wang, and Yi Yang. Forthcoming. “FinBERT:
A Large Language Model for Extracting Information from
Financial Text.” Contemporary Accounting Research.
Hutto, Clayton J., and Eric Gilbert. 2014. “VADER: A
Parsimonious Rule-Based Model for Sentiment Analysis of
Social Media Text.” Proceedings of the Eighth International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media 8 (1):
216–25. https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICWSM/article/
view/14550/14399.
Joshi, Mandar, Danqi Chen, Yinhan Liu, Daniel S. Weld,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy. 2020. “SpanBERT:
Improving Pre-Training by Representing and Predicting
Spans.” Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics 8: 64–77.
Liu, Yinhan, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar
Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer,
and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019. “RoBERTa: A Robustly
Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach.” Cornell University,
arXiv:1907.11692 (26 July).
Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald. 2011. “When Is a Liability
Not a Liability? Textual Analysis, Dictionaries, and 10-Ks.”
Journal of Finance 66 (1): 35–65.
Mikolov, Tomas, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean.
2013. “Efficient Estimation of Word Representations
in Vector Space.” Cornell University, arXiv:1301.3781
(7 September).

Pennington, Jeffrey, Richard Socher, and Christopher
D. Manning. 2014. “GloVe: Global Vectors for Word
Representation.” Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP)
(October): 1532–43.
Raffel, Colin, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee,
Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and
Peter J. Liu. 2020. “Exploring the Limits of Transfer Learning
with a Unified Text-to-Text Transformer.” Cornell University,
arXiv:1910.10683 (28 July).
Rajpurkar, Pranav, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and
Percy Liang. 2016. “SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions for
Machine Comprehension of Text.” Proceedings of the 2016
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (November): 2383–92.
Turing, Alan Mathison. 1950. “Computing Machinery and
Intelligence.” Mind LIX (236): 433–60.
Vaswani, Ashish, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser,
and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. “Attention Is All You Need.”
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
30, edited by I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, 5998–6008.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

55

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

5. ADVANCES IN NATURAL LANGUAGE
UNDERSTANDING FOR INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT
Stefan Jansen, CFA
Founder and Lead Data Scientist, Applied AI

Introduction
Investors have long sifted through documents searching
for facts that corroborate fundamental analysis, support
forecasts, or provide insight into market dynamics. Given
the importance of language for communication, it is not
surprising that 80%–90% of information is available only
in unstructured forms, such as text or audio, making it
much harder to work with than tabular data that conform to
database and excel formats (Harbert 2021). However, such
data can enable more valuable, differentiated insights than
numerical data in widespread use alone.
Text data sources relevant for investors depend on the
asset class and investment horizon. They can be very
diverse, ranging from regulatory filings and research
reports to financial news and social media content. In
addition, legal contracts may play an essential role for,
for example, debt or real estate investments. Substantial
improvements in speech recognition enable real-time
processing of audio data, such as earnings calls, adding
speaker tone, and other verbal nuances, which may
uncover hidden insights. Similar advances in machine
translation expand this universe to any common language.
Over the last two decades, electronic access to text data
with information affecting investment decisions in real
time has increased by orders of magnitude. Automated
downloads of corporate 10-K and 10-Q SEC filings, for
instance, multiplied almost 500 times, from 360,861 in
2003 to around 165 million in 2016 (Cao, Jiang, Yang, and
Zhang 2020). Machines have been driving part of this data
explosion: In 2015, the Associated Press (AP) was already
generating over 3,000 stories automatically on US corporate earnings per quarter, a tenfold increase over previous
human production. The output had grown by more than 50%
by 2017, while other outlets followed the AP’s lead.
Unsurprisingly, the resulting data deluge has accelerated
research into natural language processing (NLP), the
AI discipline that cuts across linguistics and computer
science and focuses on the ability of machines to make
sense of text data. Practical goals are to automate and
accelerate the analysis of text data or augment the capabilities of humans to do so. In 2016, J.P. Morgan deployed
technology that could read 12,000 documents to extract
150 attributes relevant for human review in seconds,
compared to 360,000 person-hours per year needed previously, all while being more accurate. NLP use cases vary
56

CFA Institute Research Foundation

from matching patterns and summarizing documents to
making actionable predictions. They include standardizing
and tagging investment targets across a large body of
documents, scoring news sentiment or environmental,
social, and governance (ESG) disclosures, flagging compliance issues, and forecasting market prices. Sustained R&D
has improved applications that help manage and exploit
the explosion of unstructured language data in versatile
ways to create value along the investment process.
These applications can boost analyst productivity by
imposing structure on documents and their content, focus
the attention of portfolio managers by prioritizing news
flow, and facilitate risk management by detecting material
events in real time. They can also support investment
decisions by generating alpha signals.
The most impressive improvements build on breakthroughs
in machine learning (ML), particularly deep learning,
where new language models have dramatically boosted
performance on various tasks. However, organizations
with a range of resources can leverage NLP applications
because cloud-based application programming interfaces
(APIs), high-quality open-source building blocks, and a
growing vendor ecosystem have simplified the adoption
or development of NLP solutions. At the other end of the
spectrum, cutting-edge systems that generate proprietary
alpha signals require an in-house team of specialists. This
chapter describes NLP applications used by analysts and
discretionary or systematic portfolio managers and characterizes emerging applications under development at
leading quantitatively oriented funds. I begin by explaining
key challenges facing NLP by machines and how recent
advances have addressed them much better than earlier
approaches. Then, I outline various categories of NLP applications and how they are used throughout the investment
process. Finally, I illustrate three popular financial NLP use
cases in more detail.

Challenges Faced by NLP
Making sense of language, never easy for machines,
is even harder in finance.
Human language has many characteristics that make it
notoriously hard for machines to process, interpret, and act
on. It builds on complex grammatical rules, idiomatic usage,
and contextual understanding—all of which humans take a
significant amount of time to learn. Common challenges in

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

interpreting language require decisions between multiple
meanings for the same word, which may require context
not provided in the document but instead assumed to be
known to the reader. An early machine translation attempt
illustrates how this process can go wrong: “out of sight,
out of mind” translated into Russian and back to English
produced “invisible, insane” (Pollack 1983).
A key challenge particular to machines is the requisite
conversion of text into numbers suitable for digital computation. The output tends to simplify the intricate structure
of language by omitting or weakening critical relationships
among words, phrases, and sentences. As a result, algorithms have struggled for a long time to recover the meaning of statements and documents.
Popular applications such as sentiment analysis used relatively simplistic, error-prone approaches: They relied on the
presence of specific words or language patterns defined
by humans to evaluate statements or flag events, as we
will see in more detail later. Such methods are transparent
and intuitive but often have limited flexibility and sensitivity
compared to language models with more sophisticated
understanding.
Additional challenges emerge with domain-specific uses
of language, as in finance. The need to account for the
distinct semantics of technical terms and incorporate specialized vocabulary limits the transfer of applications that
have proven helpful in other areas, such as online search,
marketing, and customer service.
Sentiment analysis, for instance, one of the most popular
financial NLP applications, is used across industries to
evaluate customer feedback. However, as we will see in
more detail, investor communication differs too much for
results to carry over. These differences also limit the data
that specialized applications can learn from. As a result,
text-based applications in finance are lagging substantially
behind developments in other domains.

Progress of NLP Applications
in Investments
Notwithstanding these hurdles, ML applications for text
data have advanced dramatically, driven by the familiar
trifecta of more data, faster computation, and better algorithms. Paralleling critical developments in other AI disciplines over the last two to three decades, NLP has gradually
abandoned techniques based on rules crafted by domain
specialists, such as linguists, in favor of statistical models
that learn relevant patterns directly from text data.
Over the last 5–10 years, language models based on
novel deep neural network architectures have evolved to
capture the nuances of language much more accurately
than before. Recent breakthroughs involve using neural

networks that learn how to represent words as vectors
rather than individual integers (Mikolov, Sutskever, Chen,
Corrado, and Dean 2013). These so-called embedding
vectors contain hundreds of real numbers that reflect
language usage in context because they are optimized to
predict terms that are missing from a given piece of text.
More specifically, the location of a vector captures much of
a word’s meaning in the sense of “know a word by the company it keeps” (Firth 1957). Not only are synonyms nearby,
but even more complex relationships have vector equivalents: For example, the vector pointing from France to Paris
would be parallel and of equal length to the one connecting
Japan and Tokyo.
In another critical step forward, the transformer architecture abandoned recurrent neural networks, the hitherto
dominant way to process text data due to its sequential
nature, in favor of the attention mechanism (Vaswani,
Shazeer, Parmar, Uszkoreit, Jones, Gomez, Kaiser, and
Polosukhin 2017). This innovation allows modeling dependencies between words regardless of distance and parallelizing the training process. The benefits are step changes
in scale: Models can learn from much longer sequences,
benefit from dramatically larger datasets, and rely on many
more parameters.
State-of-the-art implementations now reach or exceed
human-level performance on various benchmark tasks from
sentiment analysis to paraphrasing or question answering
(Wang, Pruksachatkun, Nangia, Singh, Michael, Hill, Levy,
and Bowman 2019). Google introduced machine translation
systems based on neural networks that reduced errors by
60% in 2016. Recent machine translation systems produce
outputs that humans have difficulty distinguishing from
those of a professional translator (Popel, Tomkova, Tomek,
Kaiser, Uszkoreit, Bojar, and Žabokrtský 2020).
These large-scale models require a massive amount of
unlabeled data and computation to extract their intricate understanding of language, which would make this
new technology cost prohibitive for most applications.
Fortunately, the performance breakthroughs reflect an
emerging paradigm in developing AI systems toward a new
class of foundation models (Bommasani, Hudson, Adeli,
Altman, Arora, von Arx, Bernstein, Bohg, Bosselut, Brunskill,
et al. 2021). This new model class learns universal capabilities from broad data (including but not limited to text
data) that transfer to specific tasks very cost effectively.
Instances of this new model class have begun to generate
computer code and prove mathematical theorems (Polu
and Sutskever 2020). Multimodal models that integrate,
for example, text and audio data add intent parsing to
speech recognition to capture nuances of language; under
active research for voice assistants, applications aiming
to read between the lines of earnings call transcripts are
also emerging. Model performance appears to scale reliably with input data and model size, and the foreseeable
CFA Institute Research Foundation

57

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 1. The Transfer Learning Workflow
Pretraining
• Large, unlabeled generic
text data
• Open source

Fine-Tuning
• Labeled text representative
of task
• Proprietary

Domain Adaptation
• Unlabeled text representative
of domain
• Open source, proprietary

ability to boost both makes substantial further advances
likely (Srivastava, Rastogi, Rao, Shoeb, Abid, Fisch, Brown,
Santoro, Gupta, Garriga-Alonso, et al. 2022).
This new paradigm enables so-called transfer learning, which renders developing applications for financial
use cases much more cost effective and accurate (see
Exhibit 1). Pretrained models are widely available via opensource platforms, reducing model development to adapting
the model’s language understanding to its domain-specific
uses. This process can be proprietary and requires only
unlabeled data relevant to the target application, such as
earnings call transcripts, financial news, or research reports,
which are often abundant. Fine-tuning the adapted model to
a specific task, such as sentiment analysis or return prediction, requires labeled data, which may need human expertise. Still, it can be relatively small, measured in thousands
of documents rather than (hundreds of) millions.
As a result, it has become easier to unlock investment
insights hidden in unstructured text data. Established
applications such as sentiment analysis have evolved to
become more sophisticated and effective, while new applications are beginning to emerge.

Applications and Use Cases
along the Investment
Process
NLP applications aim to extract relevant information from
language data and are thus very versatile. As a result, use
cases vary widely, depending on how investors use text
data throughout the investment process and where NLP
can add value. The investment strategy, asset classes,
holding periods, and degree of process automation further
shape the specifics of suitable applications. The availability
of human, technical, and financial resources affects the
sophistication of applications and influences decisions
about external sourcing and in-house development.
The most popular applications cover a spectrum from data
management, research support, and idea generation to
alpha signal generation:
•

58

On one end of the spectrum are applications that aim
to boost the productivity of research analysts faced
with growing amounts of potentially relevant text data.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

Deployment
• New data
• Proprietary

NLP solutions that focus on efficiency range from tagging, intelligent search, text summarization, and document comparison to the discovery of topics based on
ML that helps organize large numbers of documents.
•

On the other end are applications that extract predictive signals to generate alpha using state-of-the-art
deep learning models. The outputs can inform discretionary and systematic portfolio management decisions or feed into further models to drive an automated
strategy.

Along this spectrum exist numerous applications that
quantify or score text content for specific characteristics
deemed insightful and complementary to the content
alone. Well-known examples include the analysis of sentiment, which can be defined in various ways, as we will see
later. Alternative targets include ESG scores that measure
how well corporate communication aligns with certain
concepts. Approaches have tracked the evolution of NLP
technology, as I will discuss in more detail.
Various inputs and techniques underlie most NLP applications. Data sources are the starting point and have
multiplied and diversified. They range from public sources,
such as machine-readable SEC filings, to familiar aggregators, such as Bloomberg, S&P Global, or Refinitiv (now
LSEG Labs). Primary news or social media sources are now
offering data to investors, as do companies that generate text data. Web-scraping produces potentially more
exclusive data but is more resource intensive. Vendors
have emerged that collect and aggregate text data, such
as earnings calls. Depending on the source format, additional data preparation may be required to make raw data
machine readable using, for example, image recognition,
OCR (optical character recognition), or PDF (portable document format) extraction.
Text preprocessing segments raw text into tokens and
higher-order elements, such as paragraphs, sentences, and
phrases. Another critical step to enable further analysis is
tagging text elements with linguistic annotations and other
metadata, in particular, entity information, to resolve references to investment targets. Alternatively, data providers
also provide “machine-ready” news that incorporates some
metadata.
Investment firms that seriously pursue NLP tend to build proprietary pipelines using open-source tools that convert text

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

data into custom model inputs because of the high added
value at this step. Like other AI disciplines, open-source
software has played an essential role in pushing the NLP
research frontier, facilitating widespread technology adoption, and developing applications. A central reason is that the
NLP workflow has common steps that can share tools. The
Python language community has been particularly active in
this regard. A popular Python library for these tasks is spaCy.
As a result, the development cost of custom NLP applications has dropped significantly and has become accessible to medium-sized firms. Furthermore, vendors have
emerged that provide specialized solutions for certain
workflow aspects and end-to-end solutions for specific
applications: The estimated value of the global NLP market
was USD10 billion in 2019 and is projected to grow to
USD33 billion by 2025 (Lewington and Sartenaer 2021).
An excellent example of the evolution and broadening
availability of NLP solutions is Kensho, which aims to make
advanced information processing capabilities available
to market participants beyond leading quant hedge
funds. The company started in 2012 and was acquired by
Standard & Poor’s in 2018, setting a record for AI-driven
deals at USD550 million, exceeding the price paid by Google
for DeepMind. Kensho had developed an application named
Warren (after Warren Buffett) with a simple textbox interface that offered investment advice to complex questions
posed in plain English. It could access millions of data
points, including drug approvals, economic reports, monetary policy changes, and political events, and could reveal
their impact on nearly any traded financial asset worldwide.
The company also provides an automated contextual analysis of changes in news flow, earnings reports, and analyst
ratings. Early adopters included Goldman Sachs, which primarily used it to advise investment clients who contacted
its trading desks.
Solutions have since evolved to focus on unstructured data
and cover several techniques and applications mentioned
previously. Namely, the company transcribes earnings calls,
extracts data from PDF documents, detects and resolves
named entities, such as companies, and links them to
established identifiers. It also offers ML solutions, such as
fine-tuning text classifiers and high-quality training sets,
including 5,000 hours of earnings call recordings for multimodal modeling.
A 2020 survey of 20 customers by the LSEG (London Stock
Exchange Group) Labs (formerly Refinitiv) found that 65%
had begun to use NLP applications. Of this group, around
one-third were just getting started, and another third were
expending significant resources to identify use cases and
deploy solutions. In contrast, the final third considered
NLP fundamental and had already implemented the most
advanced technologies, including deep learning models
(Lewington and Sartenaer 2021).

An analysis of automated downloads of SEC filings further illustrates the value different organizations place
on NLP applications (Cao et al. 2020). Exhibit 2 displays
the number of downloads over 2004–2017 by 13F filers.
Among the most active consumers of machine-readable
corporate filings are leading quantitative hedge funds, from
Renaissance Technologies to D. E. Shaw. These institutions
are the most likely to develop cutting-edge applications,
such as the end-to-end training of models that combine
text and other data sources to directly predict such outcomes of interest as returns for use in automated trading strategies. Institutions that heavily rely on research
analysts, such as asset managers (but also quantitative
hedge funds), certainly use productivity-enhancing NLP
applications to efficiently process the large amounts of
information contained in regulatory filings and other text
documents.
I now proceed to describe applications that facilitate text
data management to support the research process and
lay the groundwork for more sophisticated applications.
Then, I discuss how sentiment and other scoring tools have
evolved with improved technology. Finally, I sketch applications on the horizon at the research frontier.
I illustrate these applications using publicly available datasets containing real-life financial news (see Exhibit 3).
The financial phrasebank contains 4,840 sentences from
English language news about companies trading on the
Finnish stock exchange. Annotators have hand labeled
each sentence as positive, neutral, or negative. I use the
portion of the dataset where all annotators agree. The US
financial news dataset consists of over 200,000 financial
news articles on US companies sourced from various
websites.

Getting Started: Organizing
and Tagging Large Amounts
of Text Data
The dramatic increase in text data volume generates new
opportunities to detect a valuable signal but risks inundating the investment process with noise. To boost research
analyst productivity and focus investment manager attention on critical events, tools that automate search, categorization, and the detection of relevant information are
paramount.
The first steps toward this goal involve applying the initial
stages of the NLP workflow described previously. More specifically, they include the following applications:
•

Named entity recognition (NER): The automated
tagging of objects of interest, such as corporations,
people, or events

CFA Institute Research Foundation

59

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 2. Downloads for Select 13F Filers, 2004–2017
Investment Firm

No. of Downloads

Type

Renaissance Technologies

536,753

Quantitative hedge fund

Two Sigma Investments

515,255

Quantitative hedge fund

Barclays Capital

377,280

Financial conglomerate with asset management

JPMorgan Chase

154,475

Financial conglomerate with asset management

Point72

104,337

Quantitative hedge fund

Wells Fargo

94,261

Financial conglomerate with asset management

Morgan Stanley

91,522

Investment bank with asset management

Citadel LLC

82,375

Quantitative hedge fund

RBC Capital Markets

79,469

Financial conglomerate with asset management

D. E. Shaw & Co.

67,838

Quantitative hedge fund

UBS AG

64,029

Financial conglomerate with asset management

Deutsche Bank AG

55,825

Investment bank with asset management

Union Bank of California

50,938

Full-service bank with private wealth management

Squarepoint

48,678

Quantitative hedge fund

Jefferies Group

47,926

Investment bank with asset management

Stifel, Nicolaus & Company

24,759

Investment bank with asset management

Piper Jaffray (now Piper Sandler)

18,604

Investment bank with asset management

Lazard

18,290

Investment bank with asset management

Oppenheimer & Co.

15,203

Investment bank with asset management

Northern Trust Corporation

11,916

Financial conglomerate with asset management

Exhibit 3. Reading the Financial Phrasebank
def read_phrase_bank():
"""Load sentences and annotations and return unique values"""
label_to_score = {'negative': -1, 'neutral': 0, 'positive': 1}
file_path = Path('financial_phrase_bank',
'Sentences_AllAgree.txt')
text = file_path.read_text(encoding='latin1').split('\n')
df = pd.DataFrame([s.split('@') for s in text],
columns=['sentence', 'sentiment'])
df.sentiment = df.sentiment.map(label_to_score)
return df.dropna().drop_duplicates()

60

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

•

Linguistic annotation: Labeling of text elements
regarding their grammatical function and other
aspects

•

Topic modeling: The identification of themes present
in documents for automated categorization

I illustrate how each works and can, in turn, add value to
the investment process.

Programmatic Tagging of Content
with NER
Named entity recognition detects real-world concepts
of interest, such as companies, individuals, locations, or
custom entities in the text, allowing for spelling and other
variations to ensure robustness across various sources.
Among many different uses, it also supports compliance
processes—for example, in anti-money laundering—
because it can quickly flag critical items that require further
diligence (sanction lists, politically exposed persons, etc.).
It automatically annotates documents with tags or metadata to enable the real-time detection of such concepts.
Furthermore, it permits the integration of different datasets,
such as news data that refer to a company by name and
price data that identify relevant securities by ticker. It also
lays the foundation for analyzing relationships between
different concepts, such as competitors or members of
a supply chain, or for comparing information for a given
object at other points in time.
NER implementations can rely on predefined dictionaries
that map words to concepts or learn these mappings from
manually labeled data. The following code snippet (see
Exhibit 4) shows some of the annotations that spaCy provides out of the box—that is, without custom training—for a
given sentence: It recognizes nationality, company names,

and ticker/exchange symbols, as well as the date and
monetary values.
NER is a foundational tool that forms the basis for many
other applications. Any investment firm that aims to automate the processing of text documents will require its
results, whether it aims to use interactive applications to
augment analysts or to build more sophisticated ML models
that use documents.

Linguistic Annotation: Parsing
Dependencies among Sentence
Elements
While NER detects items in isolation, linguistic annotations
establish functional relationships among text elements in
a sentence. This technique reverse engineers the connections between objects and actions using the grammatical
structure and provides vital inputs into downstream efforts
at recovering the meaning of the content.
The details are beyond the scope of this chapter, but the
code snippet in Exhibit 5 illustrates how spaCy annotates a
fragment of the sample sentence from Exhibit 4.
It simultaneously identifies the grammatical roles of words,
such as nouns, verbs, and prepositions; the dependencies
among them (e.g., “company” is further defined by “Finnish
metal products”); and coherent phrases.
Downstream applications can use these metadata and the
resulting dependency parsing tree to screen sentences for
specific patterns and phrases, such as “net loss narrowed,”
with more positive implications than the individual words
in isolation might suggest (Marinov 2019). An example is
custom sentiment analysis that encodes specific observations about meaningful statements.

Exhibit 4. Named Entity Recognition with spaCy
import spacy
from spacy import displacy
nlp = spacy.load('en_core_web_trf')
phrases = read_phrase_bank()
sentences = phrases.sentence.tolist()
doc = nlp(sentences[331])
displacy.render(doc, style='ent', jupyter=True, options={'compact':
True})
Finnish NORP metal products company Componenta Oyj ORG ( HEL ORG : CTH1V ORG ) said today DATE its net loss narrowed to
EUR 500,000 MONEY ( USD 680,000 MONEY ) in the last quarter of 2010 DATE from EUR 5.3 million MONEY for the same period
a year earlier DATE .
CFA Institute Research Foundation

61

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 5. Grammatical Dependency Relations with spaCy
doc = nlp(sents[331])
displacy.render(doc, style='dep', jupyter=True, options={'compact':
True, 'distance': 100})
amod

compound

compound
Finnish
ADJ

metal
NOUN

compound

products
NOUN

compound

company Componenta
PROPN
NOUN

ccomp
poss

nsubj
Oyj (
PROPN

appos
HEL :
PROPN

appos
CTH1V )
PROPN

npadvmod
Said
VERB

To leverage the potential value of linguistic annotations,
organizations need a dedicated data science team with
NLP expertise to further process the results. Hence, it would
rarely be used outside larger investment organizations.

Automatic Discovery of Themes
across Documents with Topic
Modeling
A topic model aims to discover hidden themes across a
body of documents and computes the relevance of these
themes to each of them. The most popular technique is
latent Dirichlet allocation, or LDA (Blei, Ng, and Jordan 2003).
In this context, a theme consists of terms that are more
likely to appear jointly in documents that represent this
theme than elsewhere. The discovery process is fully automated given a target number of topics, which can be optimized using statistical goodness-of-fit measures.
The results share a drawback common to unsupervised
learning: The lack of a ground truth benchmark implies
the absence of objective performance metrics. In other
words, the value of a particular set of topics identified by
the model depends on how useful they are to the downstream application. Moreover, topics do not come with
handy labels; each one corresponds to a list of words with
associated weights (but humans tend to quickly grasp the
concepts behind a topic upon inspection). These practical
challenges notwithstanding, topic models are among the
most effective tools for organizing large amounts of text in
a meaningful and automatic way.
Investment firms use topic models as tools that facilitate
the research process. They are useful because they summarize large amounts of text in a much more manageable
number of themes that are easy to track over time. At the
same time, the content of individual documents transparently relates to these topics. Analysts can use this information to compare how the relevance of topics changes over
time or across related companies and quickly identify the
relevant text passages. Implementations used to require
custom developments but can now rely to a much greater
degree on third-party APIs. As a result, this technology
62

CFA Institute Research Foundation

today
NOUN

prep
pobj
amod

its
PRON

net
ADJ

loss
NOUN

nsubj

prep

narrowed
VERB

appos

nmod
to
ADP

EUR
SYM

50,000 (
NUM

nmod
USD
SYM

68,000 )
NUM

is becoming increasingly accessible to small and medium-sized firms.
Bryan Kelly, of AQR and Yale University, and co-authors illustrate a practical use of LDA by identifying 180 topics in over
800,000 Wall Street Journal articles covering 1984–2017
(Bybee, Kelly, Manela, and Xiu 2021). The authors maintain
an interactive website (www.structureofnews.com) that
illustrates how textual analysis can summarize the state of
the economy. The uncovered structure of economic news
shows several benefits of the topic model output:
•

The documents most relevant for a given topic are
easy to retrieve at any point in time because each text
has a topic weight.

•

The relative prevalence of themes also matters because
it reflects the attention that news pays to them over
time. In other words, the mix of topics at any time
reflects the current state of the economy and does
correlate with macroeconomic indicators. Moreover, it
explains 25% of aggregate market returns when used
as an input to a statistical model and predicts economic
events, such as recessions, beyond standard indicators.

Two Sigma illustrates how LDA can add value when applied
to Federal Open Market Committee meeting minutes to
quantify the relative weight of various economic issues
over time. The company’s analysis shows how financial
market topics gained relative weight, at the expense
of growth-related themes, at the beginning of Alan
Greenspan’s tenure, underpinning the market’s perception
of the Greenspan put at the time (Saret and Mitra 2016).
Exhibit 6 illustrates the selection of a random sample of
25,000 financial news articles with 250–750 words each,
the preprocessing of the text with spaCy to remove less
informative terms, and the use of Gensim’s LDA implementation to identify 15 topics.
We then use pyLDAvis to visualize the relative importance
of the 15 topics interactively. Exhibit 7 displays the vocabulary frequency for each theme compared to its frequency
across all documents. Topic 5, for instance, discusses technology companies.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 6. Latent Dirichlet Allocation Using Gensim
df = pd.read_csv('us_news.csv', usecols=['content']).drop_duplicates()
df = df[df.str.split().str.len().between(250, 750)].sample(n=25000)
nlp = spacy.load('en_core_web_md')
preprocessed_docs = []
to_remove = ['ADV', 'PRON', 'CCONJ', 'PUNCT', 'PART', 'DET', 'ADP',
'SPACE', 'NUM', 'SYM']
for doc in tqdm(nlp.pipe(df.tolist(), n_process=-1)):
preprocessed_docs.append([t.lemma_.lower() for t in doc
if t.pos_ not in to_remove and not
t.is_stop and t.is_alpha])
len(nlp.vocab) # 117,319 tokens
dictionary = Dictionary(preprocessed_docs)
dictionary.filter_extremes(no_below=5, no_above=0.2, keep_n=5000)
LdaMulticore(corpus=corpus, id2word=dictionary, iterations=50,
num_topics=num_topics, workers=4, passes=25, random_state=100)

Exhibit 7. Topic Visualization Using PyLDAvis
Intertopic Distance Map (via multidimensional scaling)
0

PC2
5
12
7

10

13
14

9
15

4
PC1

1

11

8
6
2

3
Marginal topic distribution
2%
5%
10%

Top-30 Most Relevant Terms for Topic 5 (7.7% of tokens)
10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000 50,000 60,000

apple
service
technology
inc
business
customer
revenue
cloud
t
amazon
network
mobile
iphone
platform
product
base
growth
software
digital
device
microsoft
solution
tech
datum
user
help
g
launch
include
buy

Overall term frequency
Estimated term frequency within the selected topic
1. saliency(term w) = frequency(w) * [sum_tp(t | w) * log(p(t | w)/p(t))]
for topics t; see Chuang et.
2. relevance(term w | topic t) = λ * p(w | t) + (1 – λ) * p(w | t)/p(w);
see Sievert & Shirley (2014)

Sources: PyLDAvis using information from Chuang, Manning, and Heer (2012) and Sievert and Shirley (2014).
CFA Institute Research Foundation

63

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Scoring Text for Sentiment
Analysis

In 2011, Loughran and McDonald demonstrated how
the specific use of language in finance requires tailored
approaches to avoid misinterpretation. For instance, investors tend to focus more on negative aspects. However, they
face the challenge that corporate communication carefully
controls positive and negative word frequencies in earnings
calls and other disclosures (Loughran and McDonald 2011).

The impact of news encoded in text data on prices has
long motivated investors to design summary metrics that
could anticipate the market’s reaction to news content.
Sentiment analysis is by far the most popular NLP application: Systematic attempts to score market sentiment
regarding new information on an asset and to invest
accordingly have been documented for almost 100 years
(Cowles 1933). Computerized sentiment analysis at scale
gained momentum after 2000.

Beyond Sentiment: Capturing
Intentions and Hidden Meaning
Loughran and McDonald (2011) introduced word lists specific to finance to capture both tone and behavioral aspects
that investors care about. Besides positive or negative language, investment managers pay attention to the degree of
confidence surrounding forward-looking statements to gain
insights into the attitudes of more informed insiders.

Sentiment analysis is very popular because scores for
news stories or corporate communications are available
from various sources, including the ubiquitous Bloomberg
terminal. Research analysts can use such scores to quantify and compare trends across a coverage universe, and
portfolio managers can evaluate news flow quality “at a
glimpse.” Scores can also be used as trading signals (and
are often promoted to this end).
However, there are many ways to derive such scores, as
I will discuss later, not least because the term “sentiment”
offers room for interpretation. Custom implementations
tend to provide more valuable information because they
control the definition of the outcome. However, they rely on
supervised learning, which, in turn, requires costly human
expertise to label data. It also requires in-house data
science capabilities or trusted vendors.

Measuring Text Characteristics
by Scoring Text Elements
Initially, practitioners relied on word lists developed in other
disciplines, such as psychology, to score the positive or
negative sentiment likely expressed by individual words.
To evaluate the polarity of an entire document, they aggregated the sentiment scores.

Common word lists thus emphasize hints at obfuscation
or deception (such as the overuse of favorable terms) or
uncertainty (for example, via the possibly unintentional use
of such “weak modal” words as “may” or “could,” in earnings
calls). Therefore, Loughran and McDonald added lists that
flagged when the word choice strengthens or weakens
material statements. Exhibit 8 lists the five most common
terms for the original seven lists, which have received
minor updates since publication.
Loughran and McDonald further differentiated these lists by
channel of communication to address additional bias. They
also accounted for differences in the meaning of words
in, for instance, regulatory filings, where the term “auditor”
does not have the negative connotation typically perceived
in business news.
Another text characteristic that investors frequently scrutinize is the readability of text, measured by such metrics
as the number of words per sentence or the number of
syllables per word. The rationale is that overly complex
language may indicate an intent to mislead or distract the
reader. Just as with sentiment analysis, the definition of

Exhibit 8. Most Common Terms in Select Word Lists
Negative

Positive

Uncertainty

Litigious

Strong_Modal

Weak_Modal

Constraining

LOSS

GAIN

MAY

SHALL

WILL

MAY

REQUIRED

LOSSES

GAINS

COULD

AMENDED

MUST

COULD

OBLIGATIONS

TERMINATION

ABLE

APPROXIMATELY

CONTRACTS

BEST

POSSIBLE

REQUIREMENTS

AGAINST

GOOD

RISK

HEREIN

HIGHEST

MIGHT

RESTRICTED

IMPAIRMENT

ADVANCES

RISKS

LAW

NEVER

DEPEND

IMPAIRMENT

Source: Loughran and McDonald (2011).

64

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

readability requires sensitivity to the context: The language
in a financial report has a different baseline complexity
than financial news, and the criteria and thresholds need
to be adapted accordingly. Moreover, critics maintain that
the complexity of language primarily reflects the size of an
organization (Loughran and McDonald 2020).

From Sentiment Scores
to Investment Decisions
Subsequently, vendors emerged that offered
domain-specific word lists and ready-made sentiment
scores. Document scores often become inputs to analysts’ research process to compare their own values
across a universe of competitors. Analysts also combine
sentiment scores with the results of a topic model to
quantify how differently alternative investment targets
discuss similar themes.
Or, sentiment scores can feed into a model that aims to
explain or predict returns. Academic evaluations of this
approach tend to find a statistically significant yet economically small association between document sentiment
and subsequent returns.
However, measuring text characteristics with dictionaries
assembled by domain experts has several weaknesses:
1.

Interpreting text by evaluating words in isolation
ignores a lot of information.

2.

Word lists are backward looking: Even if the domain
expertise that maps terms to polarity scores successfully captures signal rather than noise, this relationship may break down at any time.

3.

Moreover, if the communicators are aware of the word
lists used by investors, they may adjust their word
choice to influence the market favorably.

Word Lists in Practice
The Loughran–McDonald word lists are in the public domain,
and the code example in Exhibit 9 illustrates their use and
predictive accuracy on the hand-labeled phrasebank dataset.
The traditional Loughran–McDonald word list approach
achieves an accuracy of 66.03%. A defining characteristic
of the methods described in this section is that the scoring
or classification rules are typically handcrafted rather than
learned by a machine from data. We now turn to a datadriven alternative.

Modern NLP: Learning to
Predict Arbitrary Outcomes
from Text Data
The evolution of sentiment analysis tracks the progress in
NLP from rule-based to data-driven approaches outlined
earlier in this chapter. The rapid adoption of state-of-the-art
modeling techniques based on transfer learning are making
sophisticated applications much more accessible. As in
other industries, custom models that predict targets of interest are becoming commonplace beyond industry leaders.
These applications offer enormous flexibility because input
data and target outcomes can be designed if training data
are available. Dataset curation often poses the costliest
hurdle: It requires the annotation of the input documents
and other data with custom labels that reflect the historical
realizations of the target outcome. Such outcomes may be
price movements over a given horizon. However, they can
also be more subtle, such as the appropriate confidence
in management forecasts made during an earnings call,
the adherence to some ESG standard, or compliance with
specific regulations. If the targets are subsequent returns,

A Caveat: Campbell’s Law
The last point in the preceding list illustrates a
broader caveat to the analysis of human language: Humans adapt and modify their behavior
to game the system. Campbell’s law, also cited as
Goodhart’s law, originally formulated this phenomenon. Marylin Strathern (1997, p. 308) summarized
it as follows: “When a measure becomes a target,
it ceases to be a good measure.”

uncovers significant changes in word choice,
particularly by companies most likely subjected to
automated sentiment scoring (Cao et al. 2020).
Given the reality of executives’ adaptation to automated sentiment analysis, it can be more effective
to focus on how analysts ask questions because
they do not have equally obvious incentives to
pretend (Mannix 2022).

Careful analysis of corporate communication after
the release of the Loughran–McDonald word lists

CFA Institute Research Foundation

65

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 9. Sentiment Analysis Using Loughran–McDonald Word Lists
def download_lm():
"""Source latest LM word-score dictionary"""
url = 'https://drive.google.com/file/d/17CmUZM9hGUdGYjCXcj QLyybjTrcjrhik/view?usp=sharing'
url = 'https://drive.google.com/uc?id=' + url.split('/')[-2]
return pd.read_csv(url)
def lm_counter_by_theme():
"""Return list of terms associated with the seven LM themes"""
df = download_lm()
df = df.rename(columns=str.lower).assign(word=lambda x: x.word.str.lower())
return {theme: Counter(df.loc[df[theme].gt(0), 'word'].tolist()) for theme in lm_sentiment}
def get_lm_sentiment(df):
lm = lm_counter_by_theme()
phrases['sentence_'] = phrases.sentence.str.lower().str.split().apply(Counter)
for direction in ['positive', 'negative']:
df[direction] = (df.sentence_.apply (lambda x: len(list((x &
lm[direction]).elements())))
.clip(lower=-1, upper=1))
df = df.drop(['sentence_'], axis=1)
df['lm'] = df.positive.sub(df.negative)
df['delta'] = df.sentiment.sub(df.lm)
return df.drop(['positive', 'negative'], axis=1)
labels = ['negative', 'neutral', 'positive']
phrases = read_phrase_bank()
phrases = get_lm_sentiment(phrases)
lm_cm = confusion_matrix(y_true=phrases.sentiment, y_pred=phrases.lm)
lm_cm = pd.DataFrame(lm_cm, columns=labels, index=labels)
lm_acc = accuracy_score(y_true=phrases.sentiment, y_pred=phrases.lm)
negative
negative 120
neutral
68
positive 70

neutral positive
177
6
1284
39
409
91

one can automate the annotation process. However, if
they depend on domain expertise, labeling can turn into a
time-intensive use of human capital.
Numerous vendors offer annotation services because this
step is critical for state-of-the-art NLP projects across
industries. These include solutions that themselves
rely on AI, such as Scale AI, Snorkel AI, and Labelbox,
startups valued over USD1 billion each.1 There are also
efficiency-enhancing software tools, such as Prodigy.2
Currently, NLP applications that rely on custom models
based on transfer learning are beginning to proliferate

outside the largest quantitative hedge funds with dedicated research teams. Proof-of-concept developments can
today be put together by smaller teams so that R&D pilots
are more common in mid-sized investment firms.

From Rule-Based to Data-Driven
Approaches
Over the past few years, substantial advances in deep
learning have moved the frontier for state-of-the-art
applications from rule-based to data-driven approaches.
Here, machines learn directly from data how to interpret

1

For more information, go to the companies’ respective websites: https://scale.com/; https://snorkel.ai/; https://labelbox.com/.

2

Go to https://prodi.gy/.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

66

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

language and predict sentiment scores or other outcomes
of interest, such as subsequent asset returns or ESG
scores, more accurately. In other words, cutting-edge
applications eschew handcrafted lists and rely on ML
models to identify patterns relevant to the predictive target.
Approaches range from white-box models that learn transparent word lists from data (Ke, Kelly, and Xiu 2019) to large
language models that are pretrained on the generic text
and fine-tuned to domain-specific documents (Araci 2019;
Huang, Wang, and Yang, forthcoming).
As with a rule-based approach, a downstream model that
aims to predict returns can combine sentiment scores produced by a language model with other inputs. Alternatively,
models can be designed and trained in an end-to-end fashion.
The benefits include exploiting much richer semantic input
than word lists and the flexibility to train a model to learn
outcomes directly relevant to the investment strategy.
However, the custom approach requires curated, labeled
data: Each training document requires annotation with the
corresponding ground truth outcome.
Risks include overfitting to noise in the training sample
and limited ability to transfer the model’s learning from
the pretraining inputs to the domain-specific documents.
Fortunately, these risks can be managed and measured
before using the resulting model in a production setting.

Modern NLP and Transfer Learning
in Practice with Hugging Face
and FinBERT-Tone
Hugging Face is an NLP startup based in New York City with
USD160 million in funding and a USD2 billion valuation that
offers state-of-the-art custom solutions. It also hosts many
pretrained and fine-tuned language models and allows for
free downloads.
One of the models is FinBERT, a large-scale BERT model
based on the transformer architecture with almost 1 million
downloads per month. It trained on SEC reports, earnings
call transcripts, and analyst reports containing close to 5
billion tokens, with further fine-tuning on the hand-labeled
phrasebank documents.
The code in Exhibit 10 illustrates how to access the finetuned model and evaluate its predictive performance relative to the Loughran–McDonald word lists.3
FinBERT achieves 91.7% accuracy, a 39% improvement over
the Loughran–McDonald approach.

The sample sentence we used for Exhibit 10 to illustrate
basic NLP techniques shows why the language model outperforms: “Finnish metal products company Componenta
Oyj (HEL: CTH1V) said today its net loss narrowed to
EUR500,000 (USD680,000) in the last quarter of 2010 from
EUR 5.3 million for the same period a year earlier.”
The phrase “net loss narrowed” requires taking at least
some context into account, which simple word lists
cannot do.

From the Research Frontier:
Multimodal Models Integrate
Text and Tone
Speech recognition is key to the analysis of companies’
periodic earnings calls. Given the tight controls of the textual content and adaptation to popular sentiment scoring
approaches, it can be informative to incorporate the speaker’s style and tone into the analysis.
Recent so-called multimodal learning models jointly process different modalities, such as text and speech or video
data, and learn how to interpret these complementary signals considering the target outcome. Such applications will
likely become more common as more appropriately labeled
data become available in house or from vendors.
Early results already suggest these applications can reveal
what analysts ask about and how they do so, including
which tone they use (and how company representatives
respond). A quantified profile of the speakers’ behavior is a
valuable complement to textual analysis of the actual content and can be used to inform either human research or
downstream models.

Summary and Conclusion
NLP applications have become much more widespread over
the past 5–10 years because the greater amount of data
increased demand and improved performance. At the same
time, high-quality open-source software has become available
and popular, reducing the cost of customized applications,
developed either in house or through third-party vendors.
Many investment firms that rely on research driven by
textual input use some form of automated text processing
or scoring to manage the data explosion and human productivity while potentially improving results through the
efficient discovery of hidden insights.
Applications that quantify text content regarding relevant
metrics, such as sentiment or ESG scores, have become

The comparison is not entirely fair because FinBERT has been trained on these documents. However, the comparison demonstrates how a
language model overcomes the word list limitations mentioned previously.
3

CFA Institute Research Foundation

67

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 10. Sentiment Analysis Using a Fine-Tuned Transformer Model
from transformers import BertTokenizer, BertForSequenceClassification
def get_finbert_sentiment(df):
finbert = BertForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained('yiyanghkust/finbert-tone',
num_labels=3)
tokenizer = BertTokenizer.from_pretrained('yiyanghkust/finbert-tone')
sentiment = []
for sents in chunks(df.sentence.tolist(), n=50):
inputs = tokenizer(sents, return_tensors="pt", padding=True)
outputs = finbert(**inputs)[0]
sentiment.extend(list(np.argmax(outputs.detach().numpy(), axis=1)) )
df['finbert'] = sentiment
df.finbert = df.finbert.apply(lambda x: -1 if x == 2 else x)
return df
phrases = get_finbert_sentiment(phrases)
fin_cm = confusion_matrix(y_true=phrases.sentiment,
y_pred=phrases.finbert)
negative neutral positive
negative 120
177
6
neutral
68
1284
39
positive 70
409
91

very common. Most importantly, the unprecedented
breakthroughs in deep learning for language and transfer
learning have boosted the accuracy of such measures,
especially when tailored to the specific use case relevant
to an investor.
Progress will almost certainly continue in the direction of large language models that learn to understand
domain-specific language well in cost-effective ways. The
challenges will consist of harnessing these new technologies to automate existing processes and identifying predictive targets that add value to the investment process.

References
Araci, D. 2019. “FinBERT: Financial Sentiment Analysis
with Pre-Trained Language Models.” Cornell University,
arXiv:1908.10063 (27 August).
Blei, D. M., A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan. 2003. “Latent Dirichlet
Allocation.” Journal of Machine Learning Research 3:
993–1022.
Bommasani, R., Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman,
Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx, Michael S. Bernstein,
Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill,
et al. 2021. “On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation
Models.” Cornell University, arXiv:2108.07258 (16 August).
68

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Bybee, L., B. T. Kelly, A. Manela, and D. Xiu. 2021. “Business
News and Business Cycles.” NBER Working Paper 29344
(October).
Cao, S., W. Jiang, B. Yang, and A. L. Zhang. 2020. “How to Talk
When a Machine Is Listening?: Corporate Disclosure in the
Age of AI.” NBER Working Paper 27950 (October).
Cowles, A. 1933. “Can Stock Market Forecasters Forecast?”
Econometrica 1 (3): 309–24.
Chuang, J., Christopher D. Manning, and Jeffrey Heer. 2012.
“Termite: Visualization Techniques for Assessing Textual
Topic Models.” In International Working Conference on
Advanced Visual Interfaces (AVI), 74–77.
Firth, J. R. 1957. “Applications of General Linguistics.”
Transactions of the Philological Society 56 (1): 1–14.
Harbert, T. 2021. “Tapping the Power of Unstructured
Data.” MIT Sloan (1 February). https://mitsloan.mit.edu/
ideas-made-to-matter/tapping-power-unstructured-data.
Huang, Allen, Hui Wang, and Yi Yang. Forthcoming. “FinBERT:
A Large Language Model for Extracting Information from
Financial Text.” Contemporary Accounting Research.
Ke, Z. T., B. T. Kelly, and D. Xiu. 2019. “Predicting Returns with
Text Data.” NBER Working Paper 26186 (August).

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Lewington, D., and L. Sartenaer. 2021. “NLP in Financial
Services.” LSEG Labs.
Loughran, T., and B. McDonald. 2011. “When Is a Liability
Not a Liability? Textual Analysis, Dictionaries, and 10-Ks.”
Journal of Finance 66 (1): 35–65.
Loughran, T., and B. McDonald. 2020. “Textual Analysis
in Finance.” Annual Review of Financial Economics 12:
357–75.
Mannix, R. 2022. “Analysts Reveal More than Company
Execs on Earnings Calls—AB.” Risk.net (23 February).
www.risk.net/node/7932076.
Marinov, S. 2019. “Natural Language Processing In Finance:
Shakespeare without the Monkeys.” Man Institute (July).
Mikolov, T., I. Sutskever, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean.
2013. “Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases
and Their Compositionality.” Proceedings of the 26th
International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2: 3111–19.
Pollack, A. 1983. “Technology; The Computer as Translator.”
New York Times (28 April). www.nytimes.com/1983/04/28/
business/technology-the-computer-as-translator.html.
Polu, S., and I. Sutskever. 2020. “Generative Language
Modeling for Automated Theorem Proving.” Cornell
University, arXiv:2009.03393 (7 September).

Saret, J. N., and S. Mitra. 2016. “An AI Approach to Fed
Watching.” Two Sigma. www.twosigma.com/articles/
an-ai-approach-to-fed-watching/.
Sievert, Carson, and Kenneth Shirley. 2014. “LDAvis:
A Method for Visualizing and Interpreting Topics.” In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Interactive Language
Learning, Visualization, and Interfaces, 63–70. Baltimore:
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Srivastava, A., A. Rastogi, A. Rao, A. A. M. Shoeb, A. Abid,
A. Fisch, A. R. Brown, A. Santoro, A. Gupta, A. Garriga-Alonso,
et al. 2022. “Beyond the Imitation Game: Quantifying and
Extrapolating the Capabilities of Language Models.” Cornell
University, arXiv:2206.04615 (10 June).
Strathern, Marilyn. 1997. “‘Improving Ratings’: Audit in the
British University System.” European Review 5 (3): 305–21.
Vaswani, A., N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones,
A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin. 2017. “Attention Is
All You Need.” In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 30, edited by I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio,
H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett,
5998–6008.
Wang, A., Y. Pruksachatkun, N. Nangia, A. Singh, J. Michael,
F. Hill, O. Levy, and S. R. Bowman. 2019. “SuperGLUE:
A Stickier Benchmark for General-Purpose Language
Understanding Systems.” Cornell University,
arXiv:1905.00537 (2 May).

Popel, M., M. Tomkova, J. Tomek, Ł. Kaiser, J. Uszkoreit,
O. Bojar, and Z. Žabokrtský. 2020. “Transforming Machine
Translation: A Deep Learning System Reaches News
Translation Quality Comparable to Human Professionals.”
Nature Communications 11.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

69

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

6. EXTRACTING TEXT-BASED ESG INSIGHTS:
A HANDS-ON GUIDE
Tal Sansani, CFA
Founder, Off-Script Systems, and Co-Founder, CultureLine.ai

Mikhail Samonov, CFA
Founder, Two Centuries Investments, and Co-Founder, CultureLine.ai

Introduction
This chapter presents several increasingly prevalent and
effective applications of natural language processing (NLP)
techniques in environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
investing. Our guide simultaneously progresses down two
tracks: the recent history of quantum leaps in NLP modeling
and applying those advances to the present-day, highstakes challenges of ESG investing. Modern NLP thrives in
a vibrant, open-source environment, allowing investment
practitioners to stand on the shoulders of AI giants by
leveraging immense cumulative knowledge and computational processing power toward customized investment
solutions. The key features of NLP—seamless customization and dynamic adaptability—are uniquely suited for
the rapidly evolving language and standards in the ESG
ecosystem.
With approximately USD17 trillion in equity capital invested
in ESG-oriented funds (US SIF Foundation 2020), NLP-based
insights and signals already underpin a variety of ESG
datasets, widely used ratings and scores, alternative data
offerings, and proprietary buy-side investment tools. These
relatively new tools are helping address many of the mostcited challenges faced by institutional ESG investors—a
lack of standardized data from third-party providers, limited
disclosures from companies, and subjectivity of metrics
(Cerulli Associates 2022).
This chapter covers a selection of foundational and
state-of-the-art NLP advances, from word embeddings
(word2vec, originating in 2013) to large language models
(BERT, originating in 2018) to machine inference (zeroshot classifiers, originating in 2020). To support a learning
journey, the text introduces NLP techniques in progressive
layers, applying models that detect and connect who is
mentioned, what topic is discussed, and how that topic is
described in terms of tone and sentiment.
The simultaneous paths of this chapter are “hands-on”
experiences with numerous examples, plain English explanations, and illustrations of how advanced NLP techniques
can help identify ESG themes at the broad market level,

70

CFA Institute Research Foundation

the sector level, the individual company level, and even in
the context of the more nuanced topic of “greenwashing.”
By showcasing recent NLP innovations, this chapter seeks
to empower and ultimately inspire readers to apply NLP
solutions to ESG problems.

ESG Investing: The Need
for Adaptive Tools
As the concept of ESG has become part of investment
vernacular (IFC 2004), the volume of data associated with
related topics has grown exponentially. An entire subindustry of rating providers, index creators, gatekeepers, and
industry coalitions has emerged to make sense of these
growing inputs. Consequently, regulatory scrutiny has
intensified, leading to the formation of various rules, guidelines, and proposals.
However, the dynamic nature of ESG metrics continues
to pose challenges to the formation of industry standards. In just the last two years, investors have endured
supply chain risks from COVID-19, diversity and inclusion
initiatives resulting from racial justice protests, energy
security concerns in the wake of the war in Ukraine, and
climate risk related to carbon emissions. The fast pace and
market volatility of these major global events demonstrate
the need for flexible and adaptive tools for analysis and
risk management. This chapter highlights how NLP can
dynamically and objectively distill this complex landscape
at scale.
ESG covers a multitude of valuation-relevant, intangibles-related topics missing from financial statements,
such as product quality, supply chain resilience, human
capital, and management quality, as well as other metrics
traditionally associated with fundamental investment
frameworks. The breadth of topics makes standardization challenging, which provides an opportunity for active
investment research. ESG investing is yet another example
of how market participants can gain an investment edge
with novel and dynamic information that goes beyond
traditional metrics.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

NLP: Applying Human Insights
at Scale

In the sections that follow, we demonstrate how NLP
solutions are applied to some of the pressing questions
surrounding ESG:

Natural language processing, which seeks to create statistical models that understand text and spoken words,
is a rapidly growing branch of artificial intelligence (AI). In
a short time, NLP models have gone from counting words
in text to accurately inferring tone and meaning, a job
that has historically been reserved for analysts. In a world
awash in digital content, deciphering the trustworthiness,
quality, context, and biases in language requires the collaboration of machines.

•

Which issues matter most on a broad market level?

•

What ESG issues are most prominent for a given sector
or a particular company?

•

Is the sentiment around a company’s performance on
sustainability variables worsening or improving?

•

Is management spinning a story that is met with skepticism in the financial press?

•

Which companies might have rising reputational and
regulatory risk regarding “greenwashing”?

The nexus of ESG and NLP creates a scalable and customized way to extract timely insights from volumes of
unstructured datasets, such as news (broad, curated,
and widely consumed information), company and product
review sites (crowdsourced information), company earnings calls, corporate social responsibility (CSR) reports,
industry journals (information from practitioners and
experts), and countless other sources. Whereas Deep Blue
seeks to best humans at chess (machine over human), the
most useful applications of AI in investment management
put people and machines to work collaboratively, emphasizing each other’s strengths in the hope of the sum being
greater than the parts. In the investment context, ESG and
fundamental analysts can apply their knowledge with NLP
tools by creatively collaborating with in-house technical
experts or consultants—teamwork that requires stepping
out of traditional silos.

Extracting Text-Based ESG
Insights
This chapter highlights ways to explore new ESG research
or prototype new products by stacking relatively contemporary approaches on top of foundational NLP techniques.
These techniques can be learned and developed by layering on each technological advancement. To illustrate this
progression, the framework in Exhibit 1 combines three
core approaches to extracting insights from text along with
a guide to the initial structuring and sourcing of the information: who the text is about (publicly traded company),
what the text is about (ESG topics), and how the topic is
described (tone and sentiment).

Exhibit 1. Process Diagram: The Who, the What, and the How of NLP
DATA PROCESSING

APPLIED NLP FRAMEWORK

QUANTITATIVE MODELING

WHO
Entity Mapping to Public Companies
Can also be applied to people, private
organizations, product lines, etc.

PreProcessing

COMPANY PROFILES

WHAT

APPLICATIONS

ESG & Customizable Topics
General themes (”labor relations”) or
highly targeted (”greenwashing”)

Thematic Baskets
Trend Analysis
Risk Control
Stock Scoring

HOW
Additional Context
Sentiment, Situation, & Emotion
add depth to the topic in question

CFA Institute Research Foundation

71

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Corpus Creation: Financial News
and Earnings Calls
Machine-driven insight is only as good as its data inputs.
For this study, two complementary yet contrasting data
sources—quarterly earnings transcripts and financial
news—cover company developments across a variety of
ESG issues from significantly different perspectives. The
cost and time involved with fetching, cleaning, and organizing unstructured data typically represent a large first
step; however, strong demand for text-based information
sets (Henry and Krishna 2021) has led many data vendors
to provide structured feeds of news4 and earnings call
transcripts5 for NLP modeling, backtesting, and production
processes.

Data evaluation
Preparing and aggregating data for analytical purposes are
contextual and informed by how biases in the data could
affect the model’s output. In this study, earnings calls and
financial news have three primary contrasting features:
timeliness (calls are quarterly; news flow is periodic),
distribution of text (earnings calls are done for virtually all
publicly traded companies, while news is heavily skewed
toward large companies), and author’s perspective (calls
are primary-source, first-person information originating from company executives, while news is third-party
information).
Looking at the distribution and frequency of information
flow in Exhibit 2, financial news is heavily biased toward
large companies and coverage rises around earnings
season. To correct for the large-company bias, metrics are
aggregated at the company level and equally weighted to
determine sector- and market-level trends (as opposed
to weighting them by market capitalization or information share). For example, the thousands of articles discussing ESG issues important to Tesla are all mapped
to Tesla, whereas the small number of articles covering
ESG issues for Newmont Corporation are mapped to the
mining company. When those companies are rolled up into
one group for analysis, their ESG issues roll up with equal
emphasis, meaning the ESG trends revealed will not be
biased toward the largest companies that generate the
most news.

Organizing the data: Entity mapping
(the who)
Entity mapping is the process of connecting fragments of
text (from sentences to full documents) to various entities
(people, places, organizations, events, or specific product
lines). Entity mapping answers the first important question:
Who is this document or sentence about?
Mapping thousands of articles from multiple news outlets and earnings calls back to their entity (who) across
thousands of companies is a challenging task, but the
integrity of entity mapping drives the trustworthiness of
subsequent insights. For example, references to “Meta,”
“Facebook,” and “FB” need to map back to one entity,
even though the references have changed over time.
Other important questions arise in this process: Was the
company mentioned in passing, or was it the focus of an
in-depth, “long-read” article about the company? In addition to these details, online news outlets have different
layouts, formats, advertisements, pop-ups, and other
obstacles to systematically structuring text data for reliable
downstream analysis.

Leveraging third-party technology
Although entity mapping is a daunting technical undertaking, sourcing and structuring vast quantities of new
information from the internet has never been easier. For
example, financial data vendors offer a wide range of offthe-shelf solutions, including structured, entity-mapped
news feeds, so AI-driven insights are unencumbered by the
difficulties of gathering and organizing data.
The example in Exhibit 3 illustrates the simplicity, effectiveness, and scale of modern third-party solutions. Diffbot’s
query language (DQL) allows its users to query the web like
any other database.
Five simple lines of code generate over 1,000 news articles in machine-readable form (e.g., CSV or JSON), each
containing the article’s text and title and the original article
URL, augmented with rich metadata, such as the article’s
sentiment and the people, places, and general topics being
discussed. While this example illustrates a single query,
this paper draws on thousands of such queries, codified to
collect English news articles for companies in the Russell
1000 Index, across 13 of the most popular financial news
sources.6 Modern, NLP-driven application programming

Over 30 news analytics vendors are listed at the AlternativeData.org database of data providers: https://alternativedata.org/data-providers//
search,news.
4

Earnings call transcripts are sold and distributed by a handful of large data vendors, such as FactSet, S&P Global, and Refinitiv. They are also
publicly available at https://seekingalpha.com and www.fool.com.
5

www.bloomberg.com, www.wsj.com, www.reuters.com, www.barrons.com, www.nytimes.com, www.cnbc.com, www.marketwatch.com,
www.ft.com, https://finance.yahoo.com, https://apnews.com, www.cnn.com, www.foxnews.com, www.foxbusiness.com.
6

72

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 2. Information Flow by Company Size and Time of Year
Number of
Sentences
1,400K

1,200K

1,000K

800K

600K

400K

200K

0K
Largest

9

8

7

News Articles

6
5
Company Size

4

3

2

Smallest

Conference Call Transcripts

Number of
Sentences
400K

300K

200K

100K

Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
Week 6
Week 7
Week 8
Week 9
Week 10
Week 11
Week 12
Week 13
Week 14
Week 15
Week 16
Week 17
Week 18
Week 19
Week 20
Week 21
Week 22
Week 23
Week 24
Week 25
Week 26
Week 27
Week 28
Week 29
Week 30
Week 31
Week 32
Week 33
Week 34
Week 35
Week 36
Week 37
Week 38
Week 39
Week 40
Week 41
Week 42
Week 43
Week 44
Week 45
Week 46
Week 47
Week 48
Week 49
Week 50
Week 51
Week 52

0K

News Articles

Conference Call Transcripts

Note: Data are for 1 January 2019 to 31 December 2021.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

73

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 3. Example Usage of Diffbot Query Language
Plain English
Request
Diffbot
Query
Language
(DQL)

I want to see every news article about Nike or Adidas, written in English,
published by Reuters, Yahoo! Finance, or Bloomberg,
and published between the years of 2016 and 2021.
type:Article
OR(tags.uri:"EnpdllhyQM-SckYV3z0i1Dw",tags.uri:"EikhmjkE8MlSihDC4RKNRWg")
language:"en"
OR(pageUrl:"reuters.com",pageUrl:"finance.yahoo.com",pageUrl:"bloomberg.com")
date>="2016-01-31" date<="2021-12-31"

interfaces (APIs) remove the barriers of collecting, cleaning,
and structuring data, so the analyst can remain focused on
investment insights.

A Robo-Analyst’s First Steps: Word
Embeddings and Text-Based
Analytics
Having defined the “who” with entity mapping, the next
step is identifying “what” topics are being discussed in a
document, paragraph, or sentence. Counting the frequency
of specific words in a body of text is a simple way to start,
but doing so necessitates determining all the possible
words and combinations of words related to each topic.
Determining synonyms by committee can be very time
consuming and requires deep subject matter expertise.
For example, research on terms related to “greenhouse gas”
would include “GHG,” “chlorofluorocarbon,” “carbon emissions,” individual greenhouse gases, such as “methane”
and “carbon dioxide,” and so on.
To solve this problem of synonyms and tangentially related
terms, word embeddings, a foundational NLP concept,
can find relevant keywords associated with a given topic.
Once trained on a corpus of text, word-embedding models
can generate a family of semantically similar phrases for
any given seed word (the technical name for the word the
researcher inputs to find related terms). With these topic
definitions, commonly referred to as “dictionaries,” the
researcher can begin to comb volumes of text in a comprehensive, consistent, and scalable manner.

7

Process overview: Identifying ESG topics
in text
The process for connecting specific topics to companies
follows the sequence below (see Exhibit 4), which was
informed by research from the academic community and
investment managers:7
1.

Train a word2vec (word-embedding) model on
earnings call transcripts and news articles.

2.

Feed the model a small set of seed words for which
the researcher is seeking synonyms and related
words. The Sustainability Accounting Standards
Board (SASB), a pioneer in determining ESG standards, has defined 26 ESG categories.8 This study
uses roughly two- to three-word summaries for
each of the 26 categories as seed phrases for
the word-embedding model, which then created
26 phrase lists (dictionaries), resulting in approximately 2,500 phrases across all dictionaries.

3.

Match words in the ESG category–specific dictionaries
with instances of those phrases in the corpus (news
articles and earnings calls).

4.

Finally, the number of matches with terms in the
dictionary needs to be rolled up to numerically define
the original seed word. To do so, the researcher calculates the weighted sum of the phrase frequencies for
each SASB issue. The weights are a combination of the
term frequency–inverse document frequency (TF–IDF)9
of a given phrase multiplied by its similarity to the
seed phrase.

This process is motivated by the creative work of Li, Mai, Shen, and Yan (2020) and Wu (2021).

Seed words were manually extracted from issue-level descriptions available at the SASB’s “Materiality Finder” website: www.sasb.org/standards/
materiality-finder/?lang=en-us.
8

TF–IDF is a numerical statistic that is intended to reflect how important a word is to a document in a collection or corpus. The TF–IDF value
increases proportionally with the number of times a word appears in the document and is offset by the number of documents in the corpus that
contain the word, which helps adjust for the fact that some words appear more frequently in general.
9

74

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 4. Process Diagram: Applying Word-Embeddings to ESG
Training Corpus

Word2Vec Embeddings

SASB ESG Seed Definitions
Business Model & Innovation

CALLS

Environmental
NEWS

1

2

Leadership & Governance
Social Capital
Human Capital
Definitions sourced from:
https://www.sasb.org/standards/materiality-finder

Auto-Generated SASB ESG Dictionary (∼2,500 phrases)
Business Model
& Innovation

Environmental

supply chain, material
inputs, recycled
material, transportation
costs, product life cycle,
product packaging,
weather event, natural
disaster, wildfire,
climate risk …

greenhouse gas,
carbon emission,
hazardous waste,
waste water, energy
consumption,
renewable energy,
biodiversity, habitat
loss, air pollution …

Leadership
& Governance
executive leadership,
accountability, ethical
standards, regulatory
environment, lobbying,
systemic risk, anticompetitive behavior,
monopoly …

Social Capital

Human Capital

local community,
community impact,
addiction, mental
health, defect, recall,
safety concern, user
privacy, data security,
fraud protection,
affordability …

working conditions,
labor practices, fair
wages, hiring practice,
workplace safety,
workplace environment,
diverse workforce,
equity and inclusion …

3. Full Text Search
of Russell 1000 for all ESG phrases

AAPL

NKE

MSFT

XOM

4. Aggregation
weighted-sum of tf-idf * similarity to seed word

ESG Text Analytics

This dataset now has a variety of use cases, including evaluating market trends and shifts in materiality for a given
sector and monitoring company-specific news across a
large swath of ESG issues. Also, the process itself is fully
customizable to any set of seed words, allowing industry
practitioners to update or adjust the original SASB taxonomy or create an entirely new taxonomy based on customized organizing principles.

ESG word embeddings
In 1957, a leading English linguist named John Rupert Firth
(1957) noted that “you shall know a word by the company it
keeps.” Firth’s prescient words have stood the test of time;
neural networks can derive meaning by piecing together
relationships between various combinations of different
words in multiple contexts.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

75

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

In word-embedding models, each word is represented
by a numeric vector based on the usage of words and
their co-occurrences over a large set of documents. As
such, words used in similar ways are captured as having
similar representations and meanings. For example, if
the words that surround “carbon” are often related to
the words that surround “emissions,” the geometric distance between these word vectors will be small, inferring
that “carbon” is closely related to “emissions.” At the
other extreme, if the context surrounding “carbon” is
quite different from the context surrounding “hiring,” the
vector distance is large and the concepts are considered
less related.

word2vec’s simplicity and effectiveness are still useful to
researchers 10 years later.

Training word2vec on earnings calls
and news

A common technique for visualizing and exploring similarities of words in a word2vec model is t-SNE,12 which
collapses multidimensional word vectors down to two
dimensions. This approach reasonably maintains the
relationships between words, while making the dataset
neatly viewable in a two-dimensional scatterplot. Exhibit 5
illustrates where each of the most prominent SASB words
appear relative to each other.

The ESG word2vec model was trained on the earnings call
and news data. Training a word2vec model can be done via
a variety of open-source programming languages,10 including Python, R, C, C#, and Java/Scala. The implementation
presented here was carried out by using Python (the most
popular language for implementing machine learning and
NLP algorithms) within the topic-modeling library Gensim.11

The ecosystem of ESG topics, issues,
and words

This study applied one of the most popular word-embedding algorithms, word2vec, invented by Tomas Mikolov
and his team at Google in 2013. A decade in technology
years might as well be a century in calendar years, yet

Exhibit 5. The ESG Ecosystem: t-SNE Visualization of ESG Word-Embeddings
diversity inclusion

Human Capital

workplace

policy practice

equitable inclusive
inclusive culture
inclusive workplace

workplace condition

datum privacy

safety

hiring practice
safety culture workplace diversity
safe workplace
workplace culture

mental health

Social
Capital
safety oversight
oversight
compliance program
legal compliance
safety soundness
regulation supervision

privacy security
security privacy
privacy
awareness

pollution
emission
air emission
methane emission

public safety

Governance
government oversight
regulatory oversight
regulatory
legal regulatory
regulation

consumption
water usage

water

greenhouse emission
emission waste

energy waste
water reuse

Environment

conserve water
air water
material availability
sourcing
value chain
transportation labor
packaging material
global supply
logistic
electronic component
material shortage
resin

manufacturing

Business
Model &
Innovation

See Wikipedia’s article on word2vec: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Word2vec.

10

Gensim is an open-source library for unsupervised topic modeling, document indexing, retrieval by similarity, and other NLP functionalities.

11

t-Distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) is a method for visualizing high-dimensional data by giving each datapoint a location
in a two- or three-dimensional map and doing so in such a way that similar objects are modeled by nearby points and dissimilar ones by
distant points.
12

76

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

The output in Exhibit 5 demonstrates intuitive relationships
between SASB’s five major ESG topics. For example, human
capital and social capital are displayed near one another,
meaning their underlying word embeddings often share
similar contexts and themes within the financial corpus.
Similarly, governance has overlapping language with social
and human capital. Looking at the subtopics in black font,
some governance issues, such as “safety,” tend to relate to
employees, customers, and public perceptions, but terms
tied to industry standards, such as “regulation” and “oversight,” are more distant from human and social capital.

of this process can be considered a metric for the ESG concept of materiality, which measures the significance of a
given ESG topic to a sector or company.
Guided by large teams of sustainability experts, materiality
mapping is primarily qualitative and relatively static in
standardized ESG frameworks. By contrast, the text-based
model in this study systematically and dynamically connects
companies to their most relevant ESG issues over time. This
is particularly relevant for keeping up with shifts in corporate
strategy. For example, Amazon’s ESG materiality evolved as
the company transitioned from selling books online to cloud
computing, food distribution, and health care. Mergers and
acquisitions can also abruptly shift materiality.

Even a less experienced ESG analyst could replicate the
overlap and interrelationships of ESG terminology in an
approximately similar way. However, in this example, a
machine with no prior information learned these relationships in about two hours of computation time. This trained
word-embedding model is repeatable and consistent and
provides a foundation for unleashing endlessly scalable
“machine knowledge” onto a wide variety of contexts and
information sources.

These dynamic, company-level ESG exposures can then be
rolled up and applied to a variety of investment use cases,
including evaluating market trends, identifying shifts in
materiality for a given sector, creating thematic baskets of
stocks focused on certain ESG issues, and monitoring company-specific news across a large swath of ESG risks and
opportunities.

Text-based investment insights

Trend analysis

The word embeddings illustrated in Exhibit 5 provide an
intuitive map of individual words to ESG. These terms,
which are collected into dictionaries for each ESG theme,
are then detected and tabulated across millions of news
articles and earnings calls. ESG themes (the “what”) can
now be tied to individual companies (the “who”). The output

Applying this framework at the highest level, Exhibit 6
illustrates what mattered most in ESG for the Russell 1000
from 2019 to 2022, highlighting ESG issues that created
the most chatter in the financial press and company
earnings calls.

Exhibit 6. Trend Analysis of ESG Issues
300%

828% in 2020Q2

250%

Supply Chain
Employee Health and Safety

200%
Human Rights and Community Relations

150%

GHG Emissions

Systemic Risk Management
100%

Labor Practices

50%

Employee Engagement Inclusion and Diversity

0%

Q1
22
20

Q4
21
20

Q3
21
20

1Q
2
20
2

Q1
21
20

4
20
2

0Q

3
0Q
20
2

20
Q2
20

1
0Q
20
2

Q4
19
20

19
Q3
20

Q2
19
20

20
1

9Q

1

–50%

CFA Institute Research Foundation

77

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Interpreting the output in Exhibit 6, employee health concerns immediately spiked at the onset of the pandemic,
well ahead of the imposition of public health restrictions in
early 2020 (AJMC 2021). Shortly thereafter, systemic risk
management rose in frequency. Thereafter, the NLP-based
materiality measure detected widespread supply chain
issues due to abrupt shifts in supply and demand. Exhibit 6
also shows a 50% increase in references to labor practices
in 2021. This increase was later confirmed by the National
Labor Relations Board (NLRB), which reported a 58%
increase in the number of union representation petitions
over that same year (NLRB 2022). With no a priori knowledge beyond basic seed words, this aggregate market perspective of ESG topics detected several significant market
drivers in real time, unlike traditional ESG reporting outlets.

The NLP process generated an intuitive and compelling
materiality map. Among other insights, environmental
topics are mapped to energy-intensive sectors, such as
energy, materials, and utilities, while consumer-facing
industries (staples and discretionary) are mapped to
human and social capital.

Company-level alerts and profiles
The same NLP framework allows analysts to build ESG
profiles for individual companies to identify, highlight, and
monitor the most relevant company-specific ESG trends.
In Exhibit 8, the bars represent the aggregate frequency
of a given ESG issue across thousands of news articles,
broken out by year. This dashboard is intended to highlight company trends. If overlayed with a user interface,
analysts could click on each individual bar to investigate
specific statements from the underlying news articles
and earnings calls.

Dynamic materiality
Company-level ESG mappings can be rolled up for sector
analysis in much the same way that company valuations,
such as the price-to-earnings ratio (P/E), can be rolled
up into sector valuations. In other words, this machinedriven process yields a materiality map (Exhibit 7) that is
dynamic, consistent, and customizable, which connects
sectors to their most prominent ESG issues over time.

As Exhibit 6 showed, labor issues are rising from an
aggregate market-level perspective and tied closely
to consumer-facing sectors via materiality mapping
(Exhibit 7). Connecting those big-picture themes to the

Exhibit 7. Text-Based ESG Materiality Map
Most Material

2nd Most

3rd Most

4th Most

5th Most

Energy

GHG Emissions
(ENV)

Air Quality (ENV)

Water &
Wastewater Mgmt.
(ENV)

Ecological Impacts
(ENV)

Critical Incident
Risk Mgmt. (GOV)

Materials

Material Sourcing
& Efficiency
(BM&I)

Product Design and
Life-Cycle Mgmt.
(BM&I)

Water &
Wastewater Mgmt.
(ENV)

Air Quality (ENV)

Supply Chain
(BM&I)

Industrials

Labor Practices
(HC)

Waste & Hazardous
Materials Mgmt.
(ENV)

Material Sourcing
& Efficiency
(BM&I)

Air Quality (ENV)

Supply Chain
(BM&I)

Utilities

Energy
Management
(ENV)

GHG Emissions
(ENV)

Physical Impacts
of Climate Change
(BM&I)

Mgmt. of Legal and
Regulatory Env.
(BM&I)

Air Quality (ENV)

Real Estate

Ecological
Impacts (ENV)

Business Ethics
(GOV)

Access &
Affordability (SOC)

Labor Practices
(HC)

Systemic Risk
Mgmt. (GOV)

Financials

Systemic Risk
Mgmt. (GOV)

Critical Incident
Risk Mgmt. (GOV)

Mgmt. of Legal
and Regulatory
Env. (GOV)

Physical Impacts
of Climate Change
(BM&I)

Business Ethics
(GOV)

Consumer
Staples

Labor Practices
(HC)

Supply Chain
(BM&I)

Material Sourcing
& Efficiency
(BM&I)

Ecological Impacts
(ENV)

Product Design &
Life-Cycle Mgmt.
(BM&I)
(continued)

78

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 7. Text-Based ESG Materiality Map (continued)
Most Material

2nd Most

3rd Most

4th Most

5th Most

Consumer
Discretionary

Access &
Affordability
(SOC)

Labor Practices
(HC)

Supply Chain
(BM&I)

Employee Health &
Safety (HC)

Selling Practices
& Product
Labeling (SOC)

Information
Technology

Data Security
(SOC)

Customer Privacy
(SOC)

Supply Chain
(BM&I)

Selling Practices &
Product Labeling
(SOC)

Product Design &
Life-Cycle Mgmt.
(BM&I)

Communication

Customer Privacy
(SOC)

Competitive
Behavior (BM&I)

Human Rights
& Community
Relations (SOC)

Employee
Engagement
Inclusion &
Diversity (HC)

Selling Practices
& Product
Labeling (SOC)

Health Care

Product Quality &
Safety (SOC)

Customer Welfare
(SOC)

Selling Practices &
Product Labeling
(SOC)

Access &
Affordability (SOC)

Competitive
Behavior (GOV)

Note: The SASB legend is environmental = (ENV), leadership & governance = (GOV), business model & innovation = (BM&I), human capital = (HC),
and social capital = (SOC).

Exhibit 8. Company-Level ESG Profiles: McDonalds vs. Starbucks
McDonald’s

Social Capital
Issues

Starbucks

Customer Welfare

Product Quality
and Safety

Human Capital
Issues

Employee Engagement,
Inclusion, and Diversity

Unionization
news
Increasing
labor issues

Labor Practices

Business Model
& Innovation

Supply Chain

2019

2020

2021

2022
2019
Ticker/Date

2020

2021

2022

CFA Institute Research Foundation

79

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

company level, two of the largest public-facing brands in
the world, Starbucks and McDonald’s, can be scrutinized
along a handful of their most material ESG issues.13

Retraining Models for the Changing
Linguistic and Cultural Landscape

Starbucks’ labor practices received additional attention at
the onset of COVID-19 when many companies faced staff
shortages and wage pressure. Exhibit 8 indicates that labor
issues were already brewing in 2020, culminating in the
announcement of a large minimum wage increase in 2021
and a coordinated push for unionization in May 2022. By
contrast, McDonald’s faced less scrutiny on labor practices;
however, supply chain durability issues, another hidden
risk that arose from the economic disruption of COVID-19
(Exhibit 6), appeared to generate more attention given the
company’s supply chain challenges in 2022.

As the world changes, so too do the words used to
describe it. Word-embedding models learn from the
language they are trained on. Therefore, as the language
shifts, models trained on older versions of text will lose
efficacy when applied to current issues.

Training Techniques:
Language Models and
NLP Tasks
The process described in the subsection titled “Process
overview: Identifying ESG topics in text” dynamically and
systematically captures fast-moving, real-time shifts in ESG
events at the market, sector, and company levels. For best
results, however, the underlying word-embedding model
needs to be monitored and periodically retrained to capture
broader shifts in the English language. This section provides real-world examples highlighting this point, while also
clarifying key differences between domain-specific training
(e.g., word embeddings derived from financial text) and
task-specific training (topic classification of ESG issues).
This distinction helps frame more advanced NLP models
discussed in subsequent sections of this chapter.

Language shifts can be illustrated by analyzing the topic
of “telecommuting” across similar word-embedding models
that were trained at different times. Telecommuting, an
SASB Human Capital topic focusing on workplace standards
and employee well-being, underwent a monumental cultural shift during the pandemic. Exhibit 9 compares how
three word-embedding models—Google (created in 2013),
Facebook (created in 2017), and the custom model built for
this paper (in 2022)—determine which phrases are most
closely related to “telecommuting.”
Looking closer at the actual terms related to telecommuting, the older models from Google and Meta reflect a
different lexicon with more emphasis on ways to maximize
office time and minimize commuting time, whereas this
study’s model, which is trained on language from the last
few years, relates telecommuting to only remote-work
concepts and picks up the pandemic-driven paradigm shift
toward working from home. While pretrained, open-source
models are effective for exploring new ideas and deploying minimally viable products, outdated language models,
no matter how accurate at the time of training, will fail to
identify significant shifts in meaning.

Exhibit 9. Top 5 Phrases Most Similar to “Telecommuting”
Source

Google

Meta

This Study

Year

2013

2017

2022

Model

word2vec-google-news-300

fasttext-wiki-news-subwords-300

word2vec-newscalls-cfa

1

Teleworking

Teleworking

Remote work

2

Flextime

Commuting

Work from home

3

Compressed workweeks

Flextime

Teleworking

4

Flextime schedules

Job sharing

Shift to remote

5

Carpooling

Work at home

Work remotely

Starbucks’ material issues can be found at the SASB’s Materiality Finder webpage: www.sasb.org/standards/materiality-finder/find/?
company[]=US8552441094&lang=en-us. Those for McDonald’s can be found at www.sasb.org/standards/materiality-finder/find/?
company[]=US5801351017&lang=en-us.
13

80

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Domain-Specific Training versus
Task-Specific Training

machine learning (ML) for NLP tasks, weaving the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) into
ESG analysis.

There are two key steps for training a model to accomplish
a specific NLP task. First, it needs to learn the language
of a specific domain (financial text). Second, it needs to
apply that learned knowledge to accomplish a specific
task (identify what a sentence is about or how a topic is
described).

NLP can be used for sustainability and alpha purposes,
such as detecting employee sentiment from comments
in online forums or determining traits of corporate culture
emphasized by senior management. In this example, Chen,
Mussalli, Amel-Zadeh, and Weinberg (2022) demonstrate
how NLP can be used to measure corporate alignment with
the 17 SDGs.

In the subsection titled “Process overview: Identifying ESG
topics in text,” the word-embedding model (word2vec)
trained itself on text from financial news and earnings calls,
allowing it to better understand language in the financial
domain. This training step was an example of unsupervised
learning, meaning the algorithm learned patterns and associations directly from the text by itself without any need for
human input.
Even if a model understands the language of a given domain,
it still needs the requisite knowledge to solve specific tasks.
The next step in the process—creating dictionaries from seed
words—was an example of semi-supervised learning because
the human researcher defined seed words to describe SASB’s
ESG categories that the machine then used to create phrase
dictionaries of synonyms and related words, which were
used to find topic matches in financial articles and earnings
calls. While lacking sophisticated machine knowledge, this
semi-supervised approach is perfect for effectively and efficiently exploring any theme (ESG or otherwise).
For more narrowly defined classification tasks, researchers
often apply supervised learning, which requires humans
to manually label many thousands of sentences with predefined classes, or categories. The machine then learns
from these labels, detecting underlying patterns and relationships, and applies that knowledge to classify entirely
new sentences that it has never seen before. While supervised learning is more time consuming and labor intensive,
classification outputs tend to be more targeted and precise
than unsupervised models with no human input.
The next two sections—a case study from Robeco and a
section on sentiment classification with large language
models—illustrate how this two-step process can be applied
to real-world ESG problems: first by establishing requisite
domain-specific knowledge via unsupervised learning and
then by applying supervised learning to solve specific classification tasks learned from the intelligence of human labels.

NLP at Robeco: An Industry
Case Study
Mike Chen and the Alternative Alpha Research Team at
Robeco authored the research discussed in this section,
which demonstrates the power of word embeddings and

In recent years, the SDGs have emerged as a framework
that impact-minded investors can use to align their investment portfolios with sustainability. The SDGs are defined
qualitatively, which raises questions as to how company
products and operations can be quantitatively measured
in alignment with each of the goals. NLP is one way to
translate qualitative descriptions into quantitative scores.
Chen et al. (2022) described a combination NLP and ML
framework to do so, illustrated in Exhibit 10.
In this framework, the authors outline a two-step approach
whereby the initial inputs into the NLP model are various
company CSR reports. These are vectorized in Step 1 via
word embedding, which allows the model to understand
individual words and the context in which the words appear,
thereby obtaining deeper insight into the written text.
In Step 2, the output vectors are passed into the ML portion of the framework, which has been fed labels showing
company alignment with the specific SDGs. The vectors,
in conjunction with the SDG alignment labels, allow ML to
ascertain how vectorized descriptions of business models
and products map to the various SDGs (an example of
supervised learning). This two-step framework provides
significant flexibility, because each component (the
corpus, the labeling inputs, and the NLP and ML algorithms)
can be substituted as newer technologies are developed
and better or more appropriate corpus or alignment data
become available.
A key challenge when classifying SDG alignment using ML
is that few companies are aligned with any given SDG. This
data imbalance can present a problem for ML algorithms
because the naive approach of classifying all samples to
the majority case (in our example, the majority case is nonalignment to any SDG) can result in reasonably high accuracy. To address this issue, the authors used the synthetic
minority oversampling technique (SMOTE) to artificially
create training samples to allow the ML algorithm to learn
on a balanced training set.
Since the data sample is imbalanced, the authors also used
recall, precision, and F1 score to measure and compare
the performance of various permutations of the NLP–ML
framework. The authors found the best results are achieved
using a combination of the doc2vec embedding technique
CFA Institute Research Foundation

81

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

for the NLP portion and support vector machine (SVM) for
the ML part of the framework. The results obtained are
shown in Exhibit 11. Under this combination, the F1 scores
for alignment to the various SDGs range from a low of 69%
to a high of 83%.

This case study demonstrates how NLP and ML can be
combined to improve the investment decision-making
process while maintaining alignment with clients’ unique
sustainability interests.

Exhibit 10. NLP–ML Framework Used to Assess a Company’s Alignment
with UN SDGs
Labeling of Company’s
Alignment with SDG

CSR Corpus

1

FEATURE ENGINEERING
NLP Part

a. word2vec + Lasso Regression
b. word2vec + Embedding Model
c. doc2vec + Embedding Model

2

CLASSIFICATION
Machine Learning Part

a. Logistic Regression
b. Fully-Connected Neural Network
c. Support Vector Machine

SDG Alignment
Prediction

Exhibit 11. Classifier Accuracy Measures
Balanced Test Acc.

F1 Score

Recall

Precision

SDG1

0.87

0.70

0.81

0.62

SDG2

0.83

0.70

0.67

0.73

SDG3

0.79

0.80

0.74

0.86

SDG4

0.65

0.73

0.61

0.90

SDG5

0.67

0.76

0.66

0.89

SDG6

0.79

0.78

0.83

0.74

SDG7

0.78

0.79

0.76

0.82

SDG8

0.76

0.76

0.66

0.89

SDG9

0.81

0.81

0.83

0.79

SDG10

0.64

0.72

0.67

0.78

SDG11

0.88

0.73

0.82

0.66

SDG12

0.77

0.83

0.76

0.90

SDG13

0.79

0.77

0.67

0.92

SDG14

0.86

0.81

0.78

0.85

SDG15

0.76

0.79

0.71

0.89

SDG16

0.87

0.69

0.84

0.59

82

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Context Is King: Large
Language Models and
Sentiment Analysis
Having covered “who” is being discussed (entity mapping)
and “what” (insights from matching words in the corpus
with automatically generated ESG dictionaries), the next
step addresses “how” a given topic is discussed in the text.
The company-specific dashboard in Exhibit 8 highlighted
how often company-specific ESG issues were mentioned in
the news for McDonald’s and Starbucks. While helpful, the
tone of the articles was absent from that analysis. Were
events and topics recounted in a positive or negative light?
Is the company doing better or worse on a specific ESG
topic? Sentiment analysis offers answers to these questions by measuring the magnitude of an ESG event, as well
as the tone and shifts in tone over time.

Beyond Word Embeddings
While word2vec models serve a wide variety of applications, they have a critical limitation: context awareness.
In word2vec, each word is represented by a single vector,
resulting in a single meaning. For example, the following
two sentences use the word “freeze” in different contexts
that change the underlying meaning:
•

With demand slowing, the firm is undergoing a hiring
freeze.

•

An unseasonable mid-spring freeze impaired the
coffee harvest.

Using a word2vec-based approach, the word “freeze” will
maintain the same vector representation despite the obvious differences in context. The model’s inability to capture
these differences in meaning will have a negative impact
on the accuracy of downstream classification tasks.

BERT and the leap from words to sentences
In 2018, the AI language team at Google created
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers
(BERT), which was a clear inflection point in NLP. The large
language model (LLM), which learned much of the nuanced
meaning of the English language from Wikipedia (approximately 2.5 billion words) and Google’s Book Corpus (approximately 800 million words), vastly improved the accuracy of
NLP models by enhancing contextualization.14
LLMs, such as BERT, allow for multiple representations of each
word, depending on the other words in a sentence and the
order in which they appear. Operating on sentences as inputs
instead of individual words or phrases, these new models
brought machines one step closer to understanding text in a
nuanced, human-like way (see, for example, Exhibit 12).

Portable intelligence with transfer learning
A massive dataset of 3.3 billion words contributed to BERT’s
vast knowledge of the English language, but this immense
scale also limited its adoption beyond an exclusive set
of AI superlabs with enormous computational resources.
Retraining LLMs for every new task was impractical, expensive, and completely out of reach for everyone else.
Around the same time, practitioners began combining LLMs
with transfer learning, a complex mathematical technique
that enables the vast knowledge inherent in such models
to be transferred to a new classification task. With this new
ML architecture, a general purpose model, such as BERT,
could be pretrained, packaged, and reused as a starting
point for fine-tuning domain-specific tasks, such as sentiment classification of financial text. This advancement
allowed research teams of all sizes to inherit and apply
existing knowledge, ultimately leading to rapid innovation.

Exhibit 12. Limitations of Word-Matching in Sentiment Analysis
Sentiment via Word Matching

Actual Sentiment

“As far as we can tell, the company has yet to make any
progress in this direction.”

Positive

Negative

“In total, a lower nickel price eases some of our concerns
about ATI and its metal (stainless/nickel alloys) exposures.”

Negative

Positive

Before BERT, a number of models improved accuracy across a battery of language tasks, including sentiment analysis. A few notable models
include GloVe (in 2013), fastText (in 2016), CoVe (in 2017), ULMFiT (in 2018), ELMo (in 2018), and GPT-1 (in 2018).
14

CFA Institute Research Foundation

83

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Additionally, the training of LLMs requires roughly five times
the carbon emissions compared with owning a car in the
United States for one person’s entire lifetime (Hao 2019).
Transfer learning architecture boasts an improved environmental footprint by reducing the energy usage necessary
for applying LLMs15 (see Exhibit 13).

The next step of this study builds on work from researchers at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(HKUST), who pre-trained the original BERT model on financial text using 10Ks and 10Qs (2.5 billion tokens), earnings
calls (1.3 billion tokens), and analyst reports (1.1 billion
tokens; Huang, Wang, and Yang, forthcoming). In other
words, via Hugging Face’s implementation of transformers,
they were able to refine BERT (trained to the English language) to understand relevant financial language.

Democratizing NLP: Hugging Face
transformers, PyTorch, and TensorFlow

Huang et al. (forthcoming) also share two fine-tuned
(task-specific) models: FinBERT-ESG and FinBERT-tone.17
Both models were trained using supervised learning, with
researchers manually labeling thousands of statements as
“E,” “S,” or “G,” (for FinBERT-ESG) and “positive,” “negative,”
or “neutral” (for FinBERT-tone). This entire process, detailed
in Exhibit 14, offers researchers an expedient way to combine topics with tone. Note, however, that while borrowing
models is great for exploratory analysis, experimentation,
and illustrative guides, for production, it is imperative to
fully evaluate the labels and test overall efficacy for a
specific NLP task.

Open source is the final ingredient necessary for the broad
application of NLP. Hugging Face is at the forefront of an
increasingly democratized NLP movement with its intuitively designed API that abstracts powerful deep learning libraries, such as PyTorch and TensorFlow,16 thereby
streamlining and simplifying ML workflows. The Hugging
Face Hub, also known as “the GitHub of machine learning,” allows its community members (from hobbyists to AI
superlabs) to share their work with the world, hosting over
50,000 models, 5,000 datasets, and 5,000 demos.

Combining Topic and Tone

Company-level alerting

The three advancements described in the prior subsections (large language models, transfer learning, and
Hugging Face transformers) can now be directly leveraged
to create more nuanced ESG models that understand
both the topic being discussed (the “what”) and the tone
(the “how”).

To combine topic and tone, this study parses every sentence in the news dataset using the FinBERT-ESG classifier
of Huang et al. for each sentence (E, S, G, or none) and
then analyzes the same sentence using the FinBERT-tone
classifier (positive, negative, or neutral). By aggregating the

Exhibit 13. Common Carbon Footprint Benchmarks (in pounds of CO2
equivalent)
Roundtrip flight b/w NY and SF (1 passenger)

1,984

Human life (avg. 1 year)

11,023
36,156

American life (avg. 1 year)

126,000

US car including fuel (avg. 1 lifetime)
Transformer (213M parameters) w/
neural architecture search

626,155
0K

200K

400K
600K
Ibs of CO2 equivalent

800K

Sources: Hao (2019); data are from Strubell, Ganesh, and McCallum (2019).

See Hugging Face’s “How Do Transformers Work?” webpage at https://huggingface.co/course/chapter1/4.

15

PyTorch and TensorFlow are free open-source ML and AI frameworks used most often for applications in NLP and computer vision. PyTorch was
developed by Meta AI, and TensorFlow by Google.
16

See the models’ webpages at, respectively, https://huggingface.co/yiyanghkust/finbert-esg and https://huggingface.co/yiyanghkust/
finbert-tone.
17

84

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 14. Process Diagram: Classifying ESG Topic and Tone with BERT
1. Domain-Specific Training
BERT Language Model
By Google

10Ks/Qs
+ Calls
+ Analyst Reports

Pretrained FinBERT
Language Model
Optimized for
Financial Text

Hugging Face Hub

Pretraining

WWW

2. Task-Specific Training

Researchers

Sentiment
Classification
Labels

Fine-Tuned FinBERT
Sentiment Classifier

ESG
Classification
Labels

Fine-Tuned FinBERT
ESG Classifier

Open Access
to All

outputs of these two classifiers for each company, shifts
in tone from 2021 to 2022 for a given ESG topic are visible,
thereby offering a real-time system for detecting rising ESG
risk for all the companies in a given equity universe.

1.

Interactive dashboards: Analysts tracking specific
companies can create continually refreshed dashboards (as illustrated in Exhibit 15) and click on dots
that link directly to relevant reports for further analysis.

Exhibit 15 displays the sentiment shift relating to environmental practices for individual companies. Companies
in the upper-left corner represent sharply deteriorating
sentiment from 2021 to 2022, which indicates rising risk
related to perceptions about their environmental stewardship. In this example, NextEra Energy (NEE), PepsiCo (PEP),
Lockheed Martin Corporation (LMT), and Uber (UBER) all
received increasingly negative attention across a swath of
environmental issues.

2.

Risk alerts: Risk alerting is a more automated and
comprehensive approach to informing portfolio management decisions in real time by setting thresholds that send notifications to teams or combining
real-time alerts with other measures, such as the
application of an exclusionary stock screen.

3.

Quantitative analysis: While the focus of this study is
SASB-defined ESG issues, this framework is fully customizable to any company dimension (company culture scores, exposures to world events, etc.) covered
in public data sources. Text-based signals are used
across the industry as differentiating sources of alpha
and for event-based risk control. This type of analysis is available in third-party applications, such as
Alexandria Technologies, RavenPack (2022), RepRisk,
and Truvalue, among many others.18

Deeper analysis into this methodology reveals the challenges
of desensitizing models to pervasive events, such as severe
market crashes, pandemics, and wars, because economic
shocks can add noise and false positives to the results. For
example, Uber’s negative news was related to the increased
cost of gas and its effect on the bottom line for its ridesharing
services, which was only tangentially related to environmental practices, whereas the other companies received more
scrutiny that directly targeted their environmental practices.

Applications in investment management
The following list provides examples of how this technology
is being applied in investment management.

ESG Success: It Depends
on Who You Ask
Comparing differences in tone between companies’ earnings calls and their coverage in the financial press reveals
notable if unsurprising results: Companies’ descriptions

For more information, go to www.alexandriatechnology.com/esg (Alexandria Technology); www.reprisk.com/ (RepRisk); and https://developer.
truvaluelabs.com/catalog (Truvalue).
18

CFA Institute Research Foundation

85

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 15. Text-Based ESG Alerting
1.0

Elevated Environmental Risk

0.9

NEE
LMT

0.8
Level of Negative Sentiment in 2022

KO UBER

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2
Reduced Environmental Risk
0.2

0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
Level of Negative Sentiment in 2021

of their ESG performance tend to be far more glowing than
how the news characterizes their performance.
Exhibit 16 shows that management is far more likely to
speak positively about the big three ESG categories than
about non-ESG issues. The “exaggeration” or “spin” is most
pronounced when management is discussing governance
issues. Specifically, management’s tone is nearly three
times more positive when talking about governance
(9.5 positive-to-negative ratio) than when discussing nonESG issues (3.8 positive-to-negative ratio). News coverage
offers the opposite perspective with similar magnitude:
Governance issues are discussed three times more negatively compared to statements about non-ESG issues
(0.5 versus 1.3, respectively).

Drawing Inference: ZeroShot Classification and
Greenwashing
Sugar coating company performance in earnings calls
is a well-known phenomenon to fundamental analysts
and quants alike. A case study titled “Dissecting Earnings
Conference Calls with AI and Big Data: American Century”
in the report “AI Pioneers in Investment Management”
86

CFA Institute Research Foundation

0.7

0.8

(CFA Institute 2019, pp. 26–27) empirically demonstrates that
NLP can identify signs of management spin, manipulation,
and even obfuscation in earnings calls. In the context of ESG,
there’s a specific term for this phenomenon: greenwashing.
Greenwashing is an increasingly important topic in the
investment community and society at large. It describes
the activity of misleading the public about an entity’s commitment and performance with respect to ESG topics. In
fact, the negative implications of greenwashing might be
the only common ground that exists between ESG investing’s advocates and its skeptics. While most standardized
ESG frameworks include more broadly defined issues, such
as selling practices and product labeling, the narrow topic
of greenwashing has yet to be explicitly measured, which
presents an exciting opportunity to use NLP to supplement
standardized ESG frameworks with metrics for greenwashing risk. Greenwashing increasingly carries heightened
reputational and legal risk, so identifying early signals of
this concept has substantial economic value.

Designing a Greenwashing
Classifier
The goal of this section is to provide simple and effective
techniques to identify sentences that contain content

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 16. Comparison of Tone between Conference Calls and News across
Varying ESG Topics
Tone
10
9.5x
8
7.5x
6

4.9x

4
3.8x
2
1.3x
0

Non-ESG
Statements

1.1x

0.8x
Social

Environment
Conference Call Transcripts

0.5x
Governance

News Articles

Note: Tone = Ratio of positive-to-negative sentences.

related to greenwashing. A word search–based process—
one that simply looks for the word “greenwashing” in text—is
a reasonable place to start and would suffice for many use
cases. But the model can be further refined with techniques
that can classify sentences that are about greenwashing
without explicit mention of the term in the text.
In this study, sentences flagged for greenwashing
simply indicate that the content of a sentence is about
greenwashing. This does not indicate that the company
in question is greenwashing. Like the risk-alerting applications presented previously, classification techniques
provide critical first steps for dynamically and systematically tracking high-stakes ESG issues in tandem with
analyst oversight.

When a word has no synonyms
Eskimos have 50 words for “snow” because thriving over
millennia in the frigid climate required a nuanced understanding of snow. By contrast, the ESG ecosystem that
investors inhabit is so new that there is only one word that
is typically used to describe greenwashing.
Applying the word2vec model to other business words with
more history and nuanced meaning, such phrases as “data
breach,” yield a rich family of associated words, such as
“hacked” and “security compromised.” In contrast, the term

“greenwashing” returns no dictionary of similar phrases
because greenwashing is a relatively new term that combines a few concepts into one word with a meaning that
can be roughly deconstructed as follows: greenwashing =
company + misleading + sustainability.
To broaden the machine’s understanding of greenwashing,
one could apply a supervised learning approach wherein
a group of researchers would label sentences (“about
greenwashing” versus “not about greenwashing”), while
attempting to address common label-quality issues related
to ambiguity and differences in reviewer opinions. However,
this would be an enormous task, especially considering
that different sectors have entirely different materiality
to ESG topics. The next section addresses the challenge
of using unlabeled data and advances a foundational
objective of AI research: maintaining or increasing model
accuracy while reducing human input.

Introducing Zero-Shot Classification
Zero-shot classification is a relatively new NLP task that
answers the question, what is this sentence about? Unlike
fine-tuned classifiers, it does so without previously seeing
a sentence or a label (hence the name “zero shot”). Hugging
Face researchers found that zero-shot classifiers are surprisingly accurate when deployed on LLMs (Davison 2020),
CFA Institute Research Foundation

87

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

albeit not quite as accurate as classifiers explicitly trained
on the same topic via thousands of human labels.

Powered by natural language inference
Zero-shot classifiers were popularized by Yin, Hay, and
Roth (2019) and rely on natural language inference (NLI),
an NLP task that compares two sentences—a premise and
a hypothesis—and determines whether the hypothesis
aligns with the premise (entailment), contradicts it (contradiction), or does neither (neutral). Our study applies the
hypothesis “This is about greenwashing” to a series of
sentences using Meta’s bart-large-mnli model, the most
popular zero-shot classifier on the Hugging Face Hub.19
The model responds with its assessment of whether the
hypothesis is true, false, or neutral for each sentence. The
output ranges between 0% (not at all related to greenwashing) to 100% (entirely related to greenwashing).

Test driving the zero-shot classifier
Zero-shot classifiers can understand multiple dimensions
about a sentence—namely, topic, emotion, and situation
(as described by Yin et al. 2019). This is especially appropriate for such a relatively novel and complex topic as

“greenwashing.” Exhibit 17 illustrates the model’s intuition
and sensitivity to subtle changes in language. The zeroshot model intuitively adjusts its output (ranging from 0%
to 100%) to the hypothesis “This sentence is about greenwashing” according to changes in the same sentence
(relating to tone, emotion, situation, and negation).
Exhibit 17 demonstrates how the model handles nuanced
meaning by substituting words in each sentence. For example, the sentence “The firm overstated its commitment
to debt” (topic = debt) has a 16% chance of being about
greenwashing, whereas the sentence “The firm overstated
its commitment to reducing emissions” (topic = emissions)
has a 95% chance of being related to greenwashing. This
example-driven analysis highlights the model’s ability to
understand language and infer meaning in the context
of ESG.

Preliminary analysis
Exhibit 17 helps illustrate how the model “thinks.” The next
step, detailed in Exhibit 18, examines how well it thinks by
manually labeling 200 sentences and evaluating its ability
to distinguish between three different types of sentences:
sentences that contain the words “greenwash,” “greenwashed,” or “greenwashing” (15 sentences); sentences

Exhibit 17. Test-Driving the Zero-Shot Classifier
Type

Example Sentence

Shifting TOPIC in
Sentences

The firm overstated its
commitment to

Fill-in-Phrase
16%

“bringing down debt”
.

76%

“helping local communities”

95%

“reducing emissions”
Shifting EMOTION
in Sentences

The firm’s net-zero carbon
pledge was
by
experts and watchdogs.

“welcomed”

0%
50%

“questioned”

60%

“criticized”
Shifting SITUATION
in Sentences

Thus far, there has been little
evidence that the firm is
greenwashing

“ ”
.

4%
31%

“but the story continues to develop”

60%

“but the story gets worse and worse”
Shifting NEGATION
in Sentences

Regulators determined the firm
had
greenwashed
its annual ESG report.

“not”

1%
99%

“indeed”
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

Avg. Probability of Greenwashing

Go to https://huggingface.co/facebook/bart-large-mnli. The model was developed by Meta Platforms, downloaded roughly 1.5 million times per
month in 2022, and trained on 433,000 hypothesis/premise pairs.
19

88

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 18. Preliminary Accuracy Measures for Zero-Shot Classification
of “Greenwashing”
Confusion Matrix 1
Matching Word “Greenwash(ed/ing)”

Confusion Matrix 2
Zero-Shot Classifier for “Greenwashing”

200 Total Sentences

Predicted:
Sentences Related
to Greenwashing

Predicted:
Sentences Unrelated
to Greenwashing

Predicted:
Sentences Related
to Greenwashing

Predicted:
Sentences Unrelated
to Greenwashing

Actual: Sentences Related
to Greenwashing
50 Sentences

15 (True Positive)

35 (False Negative)

30 (True Positive)

20 (False Negative)

Actual: Sentences
Unrelated to Greenwashing
150 sentences

0 (False Positive)

150 (True Negative)

0 (False Positive)

150 (True Negative)

Precision = 100%; Recall = 30%; F1
Score = 46%

that describe greenwashing without mentioning the term
(35 sentences); and sentences completely unrelated to
greenwashing (150 sentences). These 200 sentences were
run through the zero-shot classifier using a 50% threshold; that is, if the classifier output is more than 50%, the
sentence gets classified as relating to greenwashing. While
this test is run on a small sample, it takes a critical first
step in understanding the model’s effectiveness.
The confusion matrixes in Exhibit 18 detail reasonably
encouraging results. The rudimentary word-matching
model is incapable of picking up on sentences that did not
explicitly contain the terms “greenwash,” “greenwashed,”
and “greenwashing.” By contrast, the zero-shot classifier
powered by bart-large-mnli correctly identified the 15 sentences containing those words, in addition to 15 additional
sentences that merely alluded to greenwashing, all without
generating any false positives. In other words, the zeroshot classifier captures twice the number of sentences
that relate to greenwashing without making any additional
mistakes.

Next steps
Running the same zero-shot classifier on a larger set of
unlabeled data (approximately 5 million sentences from
news) was fruitful but exposed the pain points of imbalanced classes (greenwashing is an extremely small fraction of broader market discussions), which requires further
refinement of the original 50% threshold. There are also
easily correctable blind spots in the classifier, such as the
word “green” leading to false positives. These early insights
provide a path forward for improving the model.

Precision = 100%; Recall = 60%; F1
Score = 75%

improve on what constitutes adhering to ESG principles.
Meanwhile, language models are advancing at an incredible pace, reducing the amount of human input required to
achieve the same results. Improving accuracy while reducing costs is a powerful accelerator for additional research in
this rich intersection of ESG and NLP.

Conclusion
The customizable and dynamic nature of NLP makes it an
ideal match for the rapidly evolving data and definitions and
the significant challenges of ESG analytics. The investment
community’s application of the techniques outlined in this
chapter will further refine their usefulness, while the combination of humans and machines is fast becoming the new
frontier in investment insight. There has never been a better
time to collect, process, and draw meaning from text, and
the innovations are only poised to continue.
Whether building AI tools from the ground up, sourcing
solutions from third-party data providers, or effectively
interpreting model outputs, the foundations detailed in this
chapter can entirely reframe how problems are solved and
redefine the questions that can be asked of data. Quite
simply, NLP can move the investment industry beyond its
current limitations of data, time, resources, and imagination
and, in tandem with ESG, create meaningful and high-performing contributions to active investing.
We would like to thank Matt Spain, Rebecca Jackson,
Vinod Chandrashekaran, Jonathan Berkow, Mike Chen,
and Mike Tung.

Tackling the subject of greenwashing head on with more
scrutiny and analysis will ultimately benefit the public and
CFA Institute Research Foundation

89

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

References
AJMC. 2021. “A Timeline of COVID-19 Developments in 2020.”
(1 January). www.ajmc.com/view/a-timeline-of-covid19developments-in-2020.
Cerulli Associates. 2022. “ESG Issue.” The Cerulli Edge—US
Institutional Edition (First Quarter).
CFA Institute. 2019. “AI Pioneers in Investment
Management.” www.cfainstitute.org/-/media/documents/
survey/AI-Pioneers-in-Investment-Management.pdf.
Chen, M., G. Mussalli, A. Amel-Zadeh, and M. Weinberg. 2022.
“NLP for SDGs: Measuring Corporate Alignment with the
Sustainable Development Goals.” Journal of Impact and ESG
Investing 2 (3): 61–81.
Davison, Joe. 2020. “Zero-Shot Learning in Modern NLP.”
Joe Davison Blog (29 May). https://joeddav.github.io/
blog/2020/05/29/ZSL.html.

IFC. 2004. “Who Cares Wins—Connecting Financial Markets
to a Changing World” (June). www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/topics_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/
sustainability-at-ifc/publications/publications_report_whocareswins__wci__1319579355342.
Li, Kai, Feng Mai, Rui Shen, and Xinyan Yan. 2020.
“Measuring Corporate Culture Using Machine Learning.”
Working paper (29 June). https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=3256608.
NLRB. 2022. “Correction: First Three Quarters’ Union Election
Petitions up 58%, Exceeding All FY21 Petitions Filed.” Office
of Public Affairs (15 July). www.nlrb.gov/news-outreach/
news-story/correction-first-three-quarters-union-electionpetitions-up-58-exceeding.
RavenPack. 2022. “ESG Controversies: March 2022” (5 April).
www.ravenpack.com/blog/esg-controversy-detectionmarch-2022.

Firth, J. 1957. “A Synopsis of Linguistic Theory, 1930–55.” In
Studies in Linguistic Analysis, 1–31. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.

Strubell, Emma, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum.
2019. “Energy and Policy Considerations for Deep Learning
in NLP.” Cornell University, arXiv:1906.02243 (5 June).
https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02243.

Hao, Karen. 2019. “Training a Single AI Model Can Emit
as Much Carbon as Five Cars in Their Lifetimes.” MIT
Technology Review (6 June). www.technologyreview.
com/2019/06/06/239031/training-a-single-ai-model-canemit-as-much-carbon-as-five-cars-in-their-lifetimes/.

US SIF Foundation. 2020. “2020 Report on US Sustainable
and Impact Investing Trends.” www.ussif.org/files/
Trends/2020_Trends_Highlights_OnePager.pdf.

Henry, P., and D. Krishna. 2021. “Making the Investment
Decision Process More Naturally Intelligent.” Deloitte Insights
(2 March). www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/
financial-services/natural-language-processinginvestment-management.html.
Huang, Allen, Hui Wang, and Yi Yang. Forthcoming. “FinBERT:
A Large Language Model for Extracting Information from
Financial Text.” Contemporary Accounting Research.

90

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Wu, Kai. 2021. “Measuring Culture.” Sparkline Capital
(24 August). www.sparklinecapital.com/post/
measuring-culture.
Yin, Wenpeng, Jamaal Hay, and Dan Roth. 2019.
“Benchmarking Zero-Shot Text Classification: Datasets,
Evaluation and Entailment Approach.” Cornell University,
arXiv:1909.00161 (31 August). https://arxiv.org/
abs/1909.00161.

HANDBOOK OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AND BIG DATA APPLICATIONS IN
INVESTMENTS

III. TRADING WITH MACHINE LEARNING
AND BIG DATA

This book can be found at cfainstitute.org/ai-and-big-data

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

7. MACHINE LEARNING AND BIG DATA TRADE
EXECUTION SUPPORT
Erin Stanton
Global Head of Analytics Client Support, Virtu Financial

Introduction
As a result of recent advances in computing power, data
abundance, and cloud services, asset managers are
increasingly eager to use artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML) solutions to unearth meaningful
insights from their data. However, despite their willingness and investment, many buy-side firms are struggling
to establish an efficient and programmatic way to do
ML-based analytics at scale. Why are these efforts failing
to meet expectations?

help inform a direction to take when unforeseeable events
occur or ML-powered solutions that overcome limitations by
using data gathered from other industries.
In this chapter, five use cases detail real-life examples
of ML’s application in the analytics and trading spaces,
while noting both the effective combination of data and
ML-based techniques used to enrich the decision-support
processes and some of the current barriers facing buy-side
firms as the technology matures. Here is a synopsis:
•

Use Case 1: Feature Importance. Designed to reduce
the number of inputs a trader needs to consider
when selecting the optimal trading strategy, feature
importance calculates a score or rank for each input
in a model. It is common for trading blotters to contain dozens, if not hundreds, of different security and
market metrics, so using an ML-based approach can
help traders focus on the most meaningful factors.

•

Use Cases 2 and 3: Transaction Cost Analysis (TCA).
Portfolio managers and traders use TCA to learn from
post-trade data and to improve future performance.
In searching for trends about which strategies work,
data are typically broken down by components, such
as the size of the order or the market cap of the stock.
In Use Cases 2 and 3, different ML-based approaches
help extract additional insights from existing trade
data to further enhance TCA analysis.

•

Use Case 4: Normalized and Unbiased Algo Trading.
The automated, randomized testing performed by algo
wheels helps traders find the best trading algorithm
across a variety of brokers; it is like the A/B testing an
e-commerce site would run to find the best product.
Just like a retailer needs to ensure consistency of
service for its customers, a data analyst must be
aware that, aside from the testing component itself,
all testers receive the same experience. In comparing algo wheel orders, a trader must account
for the different order characteristics and market
characteristics that each broker receives. Traditional
market impact models are built statistically, but now,
based on the size and scope of available data, it is
possible to handicap brokers using ML-based models.

•

Use Case 5: Trading Strategy Recommendation
Model. In Use Cases 1–4, traders had to select the
optimal trading strategy. In Use Case 5, an ML-based

Making Sense of the Data
As asset managers push their competitive edge into the
digital sphere, AI/ML solutions are growing out of the necessity for better and faster processes, calculated decisions,
and data-driven insights. In the TRADE’s October 2020 article
“Buy-Side Lags behind Sell-Side in Adoption of Machine
Learning and Artificial Intelligence,” a Refinitiv study found
that only 28% of buy-side firms were leveraging ML and AI
(Smith 2020). This lag was recently confirmed by a Q1 2022
Quant Strats survey of 100 hedge funds, asset managers,
and investment banks across the United States and Canada
that pegged regular use of machine learning in decision
making at 22% (Finadium 2022). Anecdotally, a different picture is emerging, one fueled by significant buy-side interest
and active ML skill building and development.
Like the chicken and egg paradox, the buy side needs
advanced technology and established efficient processes
to capture and store data in sufficient granularity and
requires ML expertise to help sift through the reams of
structured and unstructured data. Though buy-side traders
still consider sourcing liquidity their biggest challenge—one
that statistical algorithms cannot easily solve—they recognize the advantages of ML-assisted approaches. Based on
our observations, data delay and capture capabilities are
improving and there is enthusiasm for putting existing data
to work. ML’s abilities to uncover patterns in large datasets
and surface correlations that humans cannot detect have
buy-side traders and portfolio managers learning about and
turning to open-source ML libraries, such as scikit-learn,
tools similar to those used by traditional data scientists.
In turn, these budding quasi-data scientists are developing
such ML-based solutions as trigger algorithms that can
92

CFA Institute Research Foundation

© 2023 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

trading strategy recommendation model is offered
with an option to override should the recommendation
not align with the trader’s human intuition and experience. Incidentally, when a trader chooses to override,
this too is captured and can be analyzed to better
enhance the model.

Not All Data Are Created
Equal
Computers cannot make decisions as humans do. Human
decisions are based on heuristics and cognitive biases
against a broad field of attention to fully comprehend an
event. The use of ML-based models depends heavily on
data, and more specifically on granular data, as well as on
the humans that build them. It is important to acknowledge that all ML analyses begin with data, but not all
data are created equal. In addition to the variance in data
quality, humans also add variability via the multiple decisions they make throughout the ML model construction
process.
Advanced models, such as neural networks, make such
firms as Google successful, but they are like black boxes; it
is hard to explain why they come up with the results they
do. In trading, this approach is not optimal. In accordance
with data science best practices, model builders should
consider the following questions carefully during and after
model construction. As a matter of transparency, their
responses should also be included for every model submitted into production.
•

What data were included versus excluded, and why?

•

Assuming the data were available, what would
improve the model?

•

What consistency checks and quality assurances
were performed on the input datasets?

•

What features were included and excluded, and why?

•

What model was chosen, and why?

Use Case 1: The Role of
Feature Importance in TCA
for Auto-Order Routing
Each ML-based model created is an experiment since they
fail as often as they succeed. Sometimes, one may be able
to make a model operational, but the predictive accuracy
is low or the model does not work owing to a technical
problem. Nevertheless, ML techniques are evolving,
reducing the amount of time spent on manual analysis.

1

The feature importance approach is often where most buyside firms start their ML implementation journeys. When
evaluating the performance of a portfolio, a portfolio manager
typically performs an attribution analysis to determine which
stocks contributed positively and negatively. The output information can be used to explain performance to an end client
and/or to predict the viability of future investment decisions.
The process of TCA is a data-driven way traders and portfolio
managers can benefit by reviewing past results. Historically,
TCA has primarily been observational, dissecting the changes
in trading costs into factors, such as liquidity, volatility, and
spread. Ideally, the trader may leverage the enhanced posttrade information when execution planning and when demonstrating or confirming execution quality/best execution.
Although observational TCA is less statistical, it has proven
to be an invaluable tool for bridging the consumer trust gap.
Experience has made clear that it is essential to prove to
your end audience how well their data and processes are
understood before they can be convinced to adopt emerging
technologies, such as AI and ML; TCA has been an effective
catalyst toward ML-based analytics. Usually, once a client
gains confidence in traditional TCA capabilities, their thinking
leads them to ask whether anything is missing. For Harris
Associates, their search led them to the feature importance
approach for auto-routing execution, according to Jason
Siegendorf, the firm’s head of trading analytics:
Harris Associates had previously set up a workflow within our execution management system
to auto-route or send a subset of trades directly
to a pre-defined algorithmic trading strategy,
bypassing the trading desk. This enabled cash
flows and other low risk orders to be traded very
consistently and without trader bias in broker
selection and allowed our traders to focus on the
orders that they can have the most impact on
by sourcing liquidity and deciding on the optimal
execution strategy. We know that order size is an
important consideration when deciding if an order
is auto-routing eligible, but we also wondered if
there might be other contributing factors we were
missing out on. Applying the feature importance
function confirmed our intuition and helped spotlight other meaningful order characteristics we
typically pay less attention to.1
Typically, a human trader’s execution decision making
involves the synthesis and weighing of dozens of inputs
to make instant decisions regarding how to best execute
an order. However, brain processing studies show that
interactions are limited to three, sometimes four, inputs
(Cowan 2001). The feature importance approach assists
human traders by statistically confirming observational

Jason Siegendorf, personal communication with author.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

93

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

TCA and human intuition by explaining subtle post-trade
transaction cost patterns that may have otherwise gone
undetected. It can also be used as a guide for pre-trade
and auto-routing strategies.
The recommended ML-based approach for this use case
was a supervised random forest model2 (feature importance is built in natively); however, some buy-side clients
may prefer the straightforward linear regression3 approach.
Most traders are already familiar with the linear regression
coefficients, which can be used to determine the direction
and impact of a specific feature.

•

As inputs, labeled datasets are required for the supervised model. Following the selection of which labeled
dataset(s) to use, it is necessary to further separate the
data into training and testing subsets. Model builders
must reserve a portion of the data for testing to determine how well the model predicts with data it has not
previously interacted with, also known as generalization.
•

Step 1: Cleansing and Normalizing Data
Any ML-based process must first identify the right data
for the intended objective and determine whether any
data normalization is required. Although not explored in
this article, most of a model builder’s time is spent on the
data—data cleansing, normalizing, and removing outliers
and blank values—in addition to selecting and normalizing features before they can be passed into the model.

•

•

■

■

■

Have the drivers of trading costs changed over
time? Ideally, the data should be broken down into
time periods (e.g., month, quarter) and a separate
model should be run for each. When completed, the
model builder can compare the feature importance
for each distinct period and determine whether
drivers of costs have shifted or stayed the same.
What are the cost drivers between two types of
order flow? A trader may want to know the difference in transaction costs between single-stock
versus program trading flow, so the data would
be chunked into two respective datasets and
modeled separately.
Do transaction costs differ by fund type? To
understand the cost impacts on small-cap cap
growth and large-cap cap value, for instance,
a trader would need to segment the data into
relevant attribute datasets and then run a model
for each attribute to pinpoint the most important
drivers of the transaction costs.

Step 5: Selecting the ML Model’s Library and Training
a Supervised Model
Among the open-source ML libraries, scikit-learn is
a popular option, and since the use case involved
predicting continuous trading costs rather than discrete ones, the RandomForestRegressor was chosen.
Despite spending less time tweaking the model to
improve accuracy, its predictive power remains a significant factor when analyzing the feature importance.

Step 2: Chunking (Breaking Down) Data into Subsets
for Easier Interpretation
The following examples illustrate how chunking
(breaking down) data into smaller subsets enhances
understanding:

Step 4: Selecting the Model’s Features
When selecting the model’s inputs, avoid using a
‘kitchen sink’ approach that includes every possible
driver of transaction costs since this type of model
does not perform well with highly correlated inputs.
Several techniques exist to identify and remove the
highly correlated features; it is a step in the process.

The following steps taken in this use case can be implemented for any ML-based model.
•

Step 3: Data Labeling and Testing and Training
Datasets

•

Step 6: Selecting a Feature Importance Approach
Finally, the model builder must identify the most
influential inputs for model prediction. Here are a few
techniques:
■

■

Default scikit-learn’s feature importance.
Informally looks at how much each feature is
used in each tree within the training forest.
Exhibit 1 shows an example output from the
scikit-learn feature importance module.
•

Pros: Single command to retrieve and fast

•

Cons: Can be biased to continuous features
and high-cardinality categorical features; can
only be run on the user’s training dataset

Permutation feature importance. Shuffles a
feature to see how much the model changes its
prediction accuracy.
•

Pros: Can be run on both testing and training
datasets

•

Cons: More computationally expensive and
can overestimate the importance of correlated features

A random forest grows multiple decision trees that are merged for more accurate predictions. The reasoning behind these models is that
multiple uncorrelated models (i.e., individual decision trees) achieve much better performance as a group than individually.
2

The simple linear regression forecasting method can be used to plot a trend line based on relationships between dependent and independent
variables. In linear regression analysis, changes in a dependent variable are shown on the y-axis and changes in the explanatory variable are
shown on the x-axis.
3

94

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 1. Selecting Feature Importance
Feature

Weight
0.2904 ± 0.0302

tradeHorizon

01733 ± 0.0100

tradedValue

Expected Results Sample

0.1663 ± 0.0131

historicalVolatility

0.1217 ± 0.0137

participationRate

0.0560 ± 0.0111

percentMDV

The trading horizon is the most important factor influencing
transaction costs, followed by traded value and historic volatility.
Traders can use this to explain transaction costs post-trade and
to inform them of the costs before placing an order in the market
(pre-trade).

0.0523 ± 0.0094

spread

0.0310 ± 0.0042

marketCap

0.0230 ± 0.0041

sector

0.0064 ± 0.0053

securityType

0.0022 ± 0.0013

side

0 ± 0.0000

country

Source: Virtu Analytics.

■

■

Drop column feature importance. Manually
drop one feature and examine model prediction
accuracy.

and semisupervised approaches are explored for populating
tags where data are missing, and in the next use case, I
examine these approaches for parsing free-form text.

•

Pros: Highly intuitive and accurate

•

Cons: Need to retrain the model each time,
which can be resource-intensive

The objective for this use case is to determine the type of
commission rate when the data populating the commission-type tag are missing. The example is useful because it
illustrates that model builders might have to get creative in
how to use the data they have—solving the problem using
a different tack.

Feature importance computed with Shapley
additive explanation (SHAP) values. Uses the
SHAP values from game theory to estimate how
each feature contributes to the prediction.
•

Pros: Provides more information through
decision and dependence plots and impact
directionality

•

Cons: Can be computationally expensive and
requires a separate library

Use Case 2: Semisupervised
Learning to Cluster Similar
Orders Where Clear Tags
Are Missing
The lack of clear and consistent data tags is one of the biggest hurdles ML must overcome. Currently, vast amounts of
data are either untagged, in free-form text, or hard to integrate into the core dataset. In this use case, unsupervised

ML-based techniques can be applied more broadly to identify segments of orders that are similarly structured across
a range of partially or fully untagged attributes. Examples
include the following:
•

In cases where the fund is not consistently tagged,
details such as the number of stocks, average market
cap, average momentum, and volatility can be used to
extrapolate the style of investment strategy.

•

In cases where a trading desk discretionary tag is
not consistently tagged, details around the order
horizon, the type of algorithm used, the observed
transaction costs, and the existence of a limit price
can be used to extrapolate whether the buy-side
trading desk had full discretion over the trading strategy of the order.

In contrast with the first use case, Use Case 2 has only a
small segment of clearly labeled data, so model builders

CFA Institute Research Foundation

95

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Illustrative Example of Using Semisupervised Learning
to Solve a Long-Running Data Tagging Issue
Any time data are sourced from multiple systems,
such as from multiple trading systems, data tagging
can become an issue. An example is that while some
trading platforms easily capture the type of commission rate paid with a trade, many do not. Buy-side
traders want to be able to compare their commission
rates to a large peer-based database to get a sense of
how much relative commission they are paying.

While not easily solvable with traditional observation-based analytics, semisupervised learning allows
for the training of a model that can learn off clearly
tagged examples and then predict the commission
type for trades that do not have clear tagging. The
buy-side trader can now compare her execution-only
rate on an apples-to-apples basis to other investment
managers.

could choose to implement an unsupervised or semisupervised approach.4

k-prototype clustering algorithm that combines both
approaches into one (Huang 1998).

As previously noted, ML model construction requires significant data preparation, and in Use Case 2, this involved the
parsing of the client–broker code as an extrapolated model
feature. While the broker tag itself differs from firm to firm,
many broker destinations indicate the category of commission paid—for instance, brokerA_HT and brokerA_LT—data
that were parsed and tagged as inputs for the model
(Exhibit 2).

When the model is complete, the model builder will have
an output cluster number that, in this example (Exhibit 3),
indicates whether the record represents an execution-only
or a non-execution-only commission rate.
The output cluster number can be used to report the execution-only commission rate; the use case goal was achieved.
Nevertheless, good data science practices require model
builders to review not only results but also the components
of the model. In so doing, the modeler found that the dataset contained more labeled data than expected and re-ran
the model, this time using a semisupervised approach
(some labeled data and some unlabeled data).

If an unsupervised clustering approach is taken, then a
model needs to be selected that allows for both continuous
numerical information, such as the average commission
rate paid, and discrete categorical information, such as
the country the client traded in. Using a k-means algorithm
for the model’s purely numerical input and a k-modes
algorithm for the model’s purely categorical input is recommended. The model builder may also opt for Zhexue Huang’s

In the semisupervised model approach, a small set of data
labels was used to train a supervised classification model,
and once trained, the model could be used to predict the

Exhibit 2. Broker Code Commission Parsed and Data Tagged
Country
(categorical)

Turnover
(numerical)

Avg. Commission
Rate (cps)
(numerical)

Broker
Destination Code
(categorical)

Parsed Broker Code Tag
(categorical)

1

USA

$1,000,000

1

brokerA_LT

Execution Only

1

USA

$2,000,000

4

brokerA_HT

Not Execution Only

2

USA

$1,000,000

1.5

brokerabcd

Unknown

Client ID
(categorical)

Source: Virtu Analytics.

Semisupervised model learning involves a learning problem, as well as the algorithms created for the problem, that pertains to a small amount
of labeled examples and numerous unlabeled examples from which the model learns and makes predictions on new examples.
4

96

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 3. Model Cluster Output Number Using Parsed and Data Tagged
Broker Commission Code
Country
(categorical)

Turnover
(numerical)

Avg. Commission
Rate (cps)
(numerical)

Broker Destination
Code
(categorical)

Parsed Broker
Code Tag
(categorical)

Model
Output
Cluster #

1

USA

$1,000,000

1

brokerA_LT

Execution Only

1

1

USA

$2,000,000

4

brokerA_HT

Not Execution Only

2

2

USA

$1,000,000

1.5

brokerabcd

Unknown

1

Client ID
(categorical)

Source: Virtu Analytics.

unlabeled portion of the dataset. Even though the model
builder ultimately opted to use the semisupervised method,
the fully unsupervised and semisupervised approaches
yielded similar average execution-only rates. In ML-based
data analysis, reproducibility is an important aspect of
confirming that techniques and approaches are working
as intended.

Use Case 3: Natural
Language Processing to
Parse Free-Form Text Fields
into Data Tags
Frequently, the parsing of inputs is from free-form text,
such as a portfolio manager’s note to a buy-side trader
that might include trading instructions and constraints
that can impact a trade’s outcome. The following are some
examples:
•

Target this order for the close

•

Part of a prog, trade cash neutral

•

Avoid impact, trade in line with volume

A human reader can easily parse this text into a few simple
tags; however, to programmatically extract information
from free-form text fields, model builders must be familiar
with natural language processing (NLP). The goal in Use
Case 3 is to automate what a human can understand on a
more systematic and consistent basis, as follows:
•

Close

•

Program trade

•

Go along

Useful in post-trade learning, parsed tags can provide
a data-driven perspective on how the portfolio manager’s instruction may have affected trading costs, and in

execution planning, they can help the trader better understand what strategies work best based on the instructions
received. NLP can be used against any free-form text field
to help parse out additional information, even though our
examination in this use case focuses on the portfolio
manager’s instructions.
Google’s Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers (BERT) model was chosen because it has the
capability of enhanced context understanding because
of its process of evaluating text in both left-to-right and
right-to-left directions. As with other models, BERT is open
source and has the advantage of being pretrained on an
enormous dataset. Since its initial launch, BERT has been
adapted into sub-language versions, such as FinBERT,
which handles financial documents, and LEGAL-BERT,
which handles legal documents. The Virtu Analytics team
performs most of its NLP work on an internal JupyterHub,
where they have installed the necessary libraries and built
their codebase; however, AWS SageMaker and Comprehend
can be much quicker to set up. BERT also offers the advantage of being fine-tuned using a relatively small number of
labeled examples, which, due to the size requirements, can
be labeled by humans manually.
At this point, BERT runs like any other supervised method,
producing tagged predictions alongside probability.

Use Case 4: Transaction
Cost/Market Impact
Prediction
Leveraging market impact models, TCA determines
the quality of the execution versus the expected cost.
Currently, various transaction cost outcome prediction
approaches are based on a combination of order characteristics, stock-level market data inputs, and a model
calibration process that incorporates the results of realized
trades.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

97

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 4. Precleansed Data Noise in a Typical Dataset
Ticker

Trade Time

Shares

Volatility

Spread

Observed Transaction
Cost Outcome
(implementation shortfall)

1

AAPL

3/1/2022 10:00 a.m.

1,000

9 bps

10 bps

5 bps

2

AAPL

3/1/2022 10:05 a.m.

1,100

8 bps

9 bps

20 bps

Training
Example

Source: Virtu Analytics.

Building an ML-based model off observed transaction costs
can be challenging because of the data noise in a typical
dataset and the lack of data labeling that hampers the
parsing of text. Exhibit 4 illustrates the problem with data
noise in the use case’s dataset.
The training example in Exhibit 4 shows different observed
transaction cost labels despite nearly identical inputs for
ticker, trade time, shares, volatility, and spread, which can
result in model confusion. Data analysts are advised that
there may be other factors not captured in traditional TCA
analysis that can affect a trade, which can similarly confuse a model. Attempts to estimate market impact using
Virtu’s Global Peer database in its entirety were unsuccessful; however, when filtering off more homogeneous order
flows, such as those from the algo wheel, useful estimates
were obtained.
An algo wheel provides automated, randomized routing to
brokers according to user-defined allocations. When using
an algo wheel, the trader selects the desired algo strategy
and sends the order. Then, the algo wheel’s broker-allocation engine routes the order to a user-defined set of normalized algo strategies. Post-trade data are accumulated
over time (on average, 300 orders per broker represent a
useful dataset) to assess performance and guide future
broker allocations.
An ML-based market impact prediction model can be
applied to cross-firm flows (giving insight into how brokers
perform relative to each other) or to firm-specific flows to
account for specific nuances in their proprietary investment processes. Enrico Cacciatore, senior quantitative
trader and head of market structure and trading analytics
at Voya Financial, explains why this capability matters:
“Performance is what determines which brokers receive
more flow on our algo wheel, and we need to account for
differences in order difficulty across the flow that each of
our counterparties receives. The Machine Learning Market
Impact model we subscribe to allows us to handicap our
brokers while at the same time giving us a sense of what
transaction costs competing firms are achieving.”5

5

Enrico Cacciatore, personal communication with author.

98

CFA Institute Research Foundation

The random forest model was chosen to accomplish the
use case goal for market impact prediction. Several other
model types were tested, including forest-related variations, such as gradient-boosted trees, but a simple random
forest implementation performed the best in this case.
We have found that random forest models provide high
accuracy for our use cases and off our specific dataset,
which includes both numeric and categorical data, and the
results are also quite easy to explain and troubleshoot.
Every model builder is advised to incorporate a third-party
review as an integral step in the construction process.
Non-model builders with knowledge of the dataset, ML, and
subject matter should review the approach with the model
builder(s)—with all participants being strongly encouraged
to challenge the model based on the data, features, and
model type selected.
Use case in point, during our Transaction Cost Impact
Algo Wheel Model peer review, someone raised a potential
endogeneity issue related to a few features that included
order horizons. Even though the order horizon greatly
improved the model’s prediction accuracy, it is directly
controlled by the broker. The purpose of a peer review is
for users to have a common understanding of the model’s
objective so they can assess whether it performed as
intended. In this use case, the peer review team agreed
that the broker had too much control over the order horizon
and the feature was removed from the model.

Use Case 5: Trading Strategy
Recommendation
In Use Cases 1–4, ML-based approaches provided datadriven trade information but left optimal trading strategy
selection to the buy-side trader. In this use case, the
review closes with an ML-based trading strategy recommendation model. Even though this example invokes
greater risk—a suboptimal trading strategy can result in
a higher-cost trade—the reader should now have a better
understanding of ML-based alternative approaches to

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

segment order flow when data tags are unclear, how to
parse free-form text from an ML perspective, and how
market impact estimates can be constructed solely from
observed trades.
This use case’s data represented all algorithmic trades
captured across all brokers from Virtu’s execution management system. Leveraging the model at a firm-specific level
is possible; however, data requirements are more stringent
as accuracy is emphasized when a recommendation is
being submitted.
The feature importance approach was applied to identify the key data inputs for the model, which include the
following:
•

Order attributes, such as the ticker, side, sector, size,
and market cap

•

Stock clustering and NLP techniques, used to fill in
the gaps, such as whether a limit price was set and
whether an urgency setting was used for the algo
trade

•

Real-time market condition metrics, such as relative
volume, volatility, and spread compared with historical
distributions

Random forest models were then trained using historical
data for each of the algorithm trading styles available to a

Effects of Training
with Biased Data
While not discussed previously, if the
datasets used to train machine learning models contain biased data, then
the model predictions will most likely
be biased as well. If most of the training
data for the volume-weighted average
price (VWAP) strategy represented largecap stocks, which inherently have lower
transaction costs, this strategy could look
incorrectly cheap when compared to other
models that have a more representative
training sample. There are several ways
to deal with bias, and it is an important
consideration for any model that is used
directly in the trading space.

buy-side trader, including implementation shortfall, VWAP,
liquidity seeking, and dark.
Finally, the buy-side trader receives a prediction of the
transaction cost outcome based on all available algorithms.
Though it is possible to display only the winning, low-cost
strategy, it is also useful to show the cost and variability of
outputs across all strategies as part of the trader’s implementation display. Separately, some trades will be marked
as not-low-touch-eligible because of the high strategy estimates provided across all models.

Conclusion
Although the use cases presented in this chapter are successful, many experiments do not perform as expected. To
provide some balance, an example of a failed experiment
would be the effort to build a stock clustering model that
could inform a trading strategy. Though the experiment was
successful in clustering stocks by characteristics, it could
not tie them to a model that consistently informed how to
trade them.
ML-based model building can sometimes be creative,
should be collaborative, and is always iterative.

References
Cowan, Nelson. 2001. “The Magical Number 4 in Short-Term
Memory: A Reconsideration of Mental Storage Capacity.”
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24 (1): 87–114. www.
researchgate.net/publication/11830840_The_Magical_
Number_4_in_Short-Term_Memory_A_Reconsideration_of_
Mental_Storage_Capacity.
Finadium. 2022. “Quant Strats Survey Shows ML Adoption
Lagging, Third Party Spend Drops, Quantum Computing
Tops Future Tech” (17 March). https://finadium.com/quantstrats-survey-shows-ml-adoption-lagging-third-partyspend-drops-quantum-computing-tops-future-tech.
Huang, Zhexue. 1998. “Extensions to the k-Means
Algorithm for Clustering Large Data Sets with Categorical
Values.” Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 2:
283–304. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.15.4028&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
Smith, Annabel. 2020. “Buy-Side Lags behind Sell-Side in
Adoption of Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence.”
The TRADE (27 October). www.thetradenews.com/buy-sidelags-behind-sell-side-in-adoption-of-machine-learningand-artificial-intelligence/.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

99

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

8. MACHINE LEARNING FOR MICROSTRUCTURE
DATA-DRIVEN EXECUTION ALGORITHMS
Peer Nagy
ML Intern, Man Group
DPhil Student, Oxford-Man Institute, University of Oxford

James Powrie, PhD
Principal Quant, Man Group

Stefan Zohren, PhD
Principal Quant, Man Group
Faculty Member, Oxford-Man Institute, University of Oxford

Introduction
A central task in implementing any trading strategy is executing the trades required to reach a desired portfolio position.
Typically, larger trades are required to change positions for
funds with higher assets under management, and the larger
a trade is, the more impact it tends to have on market prices.
This impact can be measured as slippage (i.e., the difference
between a reference price before the start of the trade and
the prices at which trades are executed). To minimize this
slippage cost, which can lead to a significant performance
degradation over time, machine learning (ML) methods can
be deployed to improve execution algorithms in various ways.
An execution problem is usually framed as follows. The execution algorithm is presented with a block of shares to buy
or sell within a required time frame, which typically ranges
from seconds to hours. To minimize the adverse impact
of trades on the market price, this large order is split into
smaller slices that are then executed over the available time
horizon. The role of the algorithm is to choose an execution
schedule that reduces the slippage bill as much as possible. If the order was not split up this way and distributed
over time but instead was executed as a market order at the
moment the trade instruction was presented, then large buy
orders would push prices up, sell orders would push them
down, or there might simply not be enough liquidity in the
market at the time to complete the trade, leading to a less
favorable slippage cost or an incomplete execution.
In any execution problem, there is a trade-off between the
price impact and the risk of the price moving unfavorably
over the execution horizon. If we are risk neutral and have
no information on the direction the price is likely to move or
on future trading activity, the optimal execution schedule
involves partitioning all trades into smaller slices spaced
evenly over the execution horizon. This strategy is referred
to as TWAP (time-weighted average price) execution, which
serves as a benchmark for more advanced execution
100

CFA Institute Research Foundation

algorithms to surpass. Using methods from stochastic
optimal control, TWAP can even formally be shown to be
optimal under these assumptions, so it constitutes a valid
baseline (Almgren and Chriss 2000).
However, it might appear obvious that we can further improve
execution if we have useful predictions of where prices
might move in the short term. Another commonly used execution strategy makes use of information on trading volume,
or market turnover, because a higher volume allows larger
trades to be executed for the same amount of price impact.
This type of strategy targets execution of a block of shares
at the volume-weighted average price (VWAP) by splitting up
execution over time proportionately to the expected volume
profile. While expected volume is inherently a forward-looking
variable, it shows patterns depending on the time of day and
can be predicted reasonably accurately using ML models.
The mathematical finance literature also shows that VWAP
is an optimal execution strategy when volume information is
available under the assumptions of risk neutrality and permanent market impact (Kato 2015; Cartea and Jaimungal 2016).
In practice, we can enhance our execution performance in
contrast to TWAP by adjusting trade sizes proportionately to
expected volume. Estimating trading volume can be as simple
as observing a volume profile by time of day or as complex as
using deep learning models with a plethora of market features.
One role for ML algorithms in execution is therefore to
compute forecasts of short-term price movements and
expected volume that an execution algorithm can use
to front- or back-load the execution schedule—in effect,
locally speeding up or slowing down trading activity. For
example, given a signal forecasting decreasing prices
over the next few seconds, the algorithm would place a
sell trade now rather than wait for the price to fall. This
supervised learning—or more specifically, regression
problem—has been approached using a variety of methods, ranging from statistical modeling to deep learning.
It is possible to apply advanced ML techniques, such as

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Jamuna deep learning, only because of the abundance of
high-frequency data, which are essential for their training.
Predicting price movements directly is only one task of the
many that ML can be applied to. For example, ML can also be
used to forecast other relevant variables for optimizing the
execution problem, such as market spreads, available future
liquidity in the market, or volatility of the returns. Indeed, one
can even have reinforcement learning algorithms directly
choose concrete execution actions, such as sizing, timing,
and pricing of slices, to solve the execution problem.

Microstructure Data
and Analysis
Most electronic exchanges involved in the trading of cash
equities, futures, or options use limit order books (LOBs) to
match buy and sell orders using a price–time priority matching mechanism. In this prioritization scheme, orders are first
matched by their price levels, with orders at the same price
on a first-come, first-served basis. Every limit order to buy
with a price lower than any sell order in the LOB is added to
the bid side of the LOB, where levels are ordered from best
(highest price and earliest arrival) to worst (lowest price and
latest arrival). Similarly, if an order to sell is posted at a price
higher than any order to buy in the LOB, it is added to the ask
side of the LOB. Together, the bid and ask levels of the LOB
constitute the visible supply and demand for any instrument
and any moment in time (see Exhibit 1). The bid level with
the highest price is called the best bid, and the ask level

Exhibit 1. Illustration of an LOB with
Five Bid and Ask Levels
Price

Asks

Best ask price Ps

ds LS
Spread = Ps – Pb

Mid-price
Best bid price Pb

d

b

Bids

ddbb

Depth (# of shares)

Note: The arrival of a new limit sell order of size Ls at the best ask is
added to the book by increasing the depth at that level.

with the lowest price is called the best ask. The difference
in price between the best ask and best bid is called the
spread. If a market order is placed to buy (sell), it is first executed against the best price level of the ask (bid) side, then
executed in order of arrival time of the corresponding limit
order, and finally executed against the next level if the order
is larger than the number of shares available at the best
price. Rather than market orders, practitioners often use
limit orders that are targeted against the best bid or ask. A
refinement of this tactic is to use immediate-or-cancel (IOC)
orders, which are automatically canceled if they cannot be
filled at the limit price.
Given this order matching mechanism, LOBs are often
described as double-sided continuous auctions, since a
continuous order flow changes the book dynamically over
time. Limit orders that cannot be matched immediately at
the time of arrival, because either the bid is too low for a
buy order or the ask is too high for a sell order, enter the
book and provide liquidity to the market. Market orders,
IOCs, or executable limit orders—buy (sell) limit orders with
prices higher (lower) than the best ask (bid)—however, take
away liquidity from the market, do not enter the LOB, and
are executed immediately. In the case of executable limit
orders, we can also have a situation where part of the limit
order is executed, which thus removes liquidity, while a
remainder stays on the book and provides liquidity.
To train ML models for execution tasks, LOB data are required
in some form. These data can be represented at different
levels of granularity. For most tasks in this space, a univariate price time series is insufficient, and at the least, a
dataset with best bid and ask prices and volumes over time
is required to learn useful relationships. Some ML models
even train on data including multiple or all levels of the LOB
to forecast variables of interest. Such datasets can be represented either as a stream of individual orders—so-called
market-by-order (MBO) data—or as a sequence of snapshots
of the state of the LOB over time. MBO data contain different
order types (limit, market, cancel, and modify), which allow
a dynamic reconstruction of the LOB in full fidelity. For modeling purposes, however, time series of features of the LOB
state are usually more amenable to be used as model inputs.
As mentioned in the previous section, supervised ML techniques can be fruitfully applied to several prediction targets
in the execution domain. Models that can predict future
values of these variables over even part of the execution
horizon can help reduce slippage. One such target is the
market spread, because lower spreads imply more favorable execution prices for marketable orders crossing the
spread. Similarly, high trading volume makes it more likely
that a passively placed limit order will be executed at each
time step. Conversely, forecasting return volatility can be
useful for gauging the risk of large price moves over the
execution horizon. In periods of high volatility, for example,
it might pay to front-load the execution schedule to limit
exposure to the downside risk of adverse price shocks.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

101

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Over the short term, one of the best indicators of immediate
price moves in the LOB is the order flow imbalance (Cont,
Kukanov, and Stoikov 2014). The definition of the order flow
imbalance (OFI) is the order flow on the buy side: incoming
limit buy orders at the best bid, Lb, net of order cancellations, Cb, and market orders, Mb, minus the opposing sellside flow, within a period of time:
OFI = (Lb − C b − M s ) − (Ls − C s − M b ).
This measure captures an imbalance between demand and
supply in the market, which is an essential determinant
of the market price. A high positive order flow imbalance
indicates excessive buy pressure at current prices, thereby
making it more likely that prices will rise imminently.
Cont et al. (2014) describe an empirical linear relationship
between OFI and price changes.
A related LOB-derived measure of supply–demand imbalance, which can be used as a predictive signal of shortterm price changes, is the order book imbalance (OBI):
OBI =

db − ds
.
db + ds

Here, db and ds are the depths of the best bid and best
ask, respectively (see Exhibit 1). The OBI calculates the
normalized difference between the depth (number of
available shares) on the buy side at the best bid, db, and
the number of shares posted on the sell side at the best
ask, ds. This measure is limited between −1 and 1, ranging
from a strong downward price pressure to a strong upward
price pressure.
The order book imbalance is also often used by practitioners to calculate a micro-price, pmicro, which more closely
reflects the microstructure effects than the mid-price. The
micro-price simply weighs the bid and ask prices, pb and ps,
respectively, by the imbalance, I:
P micro = IP s + (1 − I)P b ,
where
I=

db
OBI + 1
.
=
d + ds
2
b

ML-Based Predictive Signals
for Execution Algorithms
A classical approach in statistical modeling is to start out
with simple, perhaps linear, models and a small set of variables, or features, that are likely to have some predictive
power for the quantity of interest. Over the modeling process, model complexity is gradually increased and features
are further engineered and refined to extract more information from the raw data. Driven by the domination of the

102

CFA Institute Research Foundation

ML literature by deep learning and artificial neural network
(ANN) models, most recent approaches, however, have
moved away from handcrafted feature engineering and
instead approached prediction problems using raw data
directly. This trend has also taken hold in financial ML and
quantitative trading.
A recent exception to this rule is the deep order flow imbalance model (Kolm, Turiel, and Westray 2021), which uses
order flow imbalance, as described in the previous section,
to predict a vector of returns over multiple short-term horizons. The authors show that extracting order flow features
from the top 10 levels of the order book is sufficient to
achieve state-of-the-art predictive performance with relatively simple conventional neural network models, such as
LSTM (long short-term memory) networks, or combinations
of LSTMs with multilayer perceptrons (MLPs). This implies
that practitioners might be able to get away with simpler
models in some cases by performing an input data transformation from raw data to order flows. These results contrast with those of the same simple neural network models
that instead use raw order book features, which cannot
achieve any predictive power on the same task, implying
that the data transformation is essential. However, another
result of this study is that linear models and simple MLP
feed-forward networks alone are not useful for forecasting
such short-term alpha signals.
Notwithstanding deep order flow imbalance models, the
trend in the current ML literature on forecasting short-term
price signals points in the direction of using raw order book
states directly, using more advanced ANN architectures to
automatically extract feature representations amenable to
forward return regression or classification tasks. One such
model is DeepLOB (Zhang, Zohren, and Roberts 2019a),
which uses a deep neural network architecture with convolutional layers and an inception module (Szegedy, Liu,
Jia, Sermanet, Reed, Anguelov, Erhan, Vanhoucke, and
Rabinovich 2015) also based on convolutional layers.
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) were originally developed for visual classification tasks, such as handwritten
digit recognition or classifying images based on their content. The start of the current popularity of CNNs came with
AlexNet (Krizhevsky, Sutskever, and Hinton 2012) and its
superior performance on the ImageNet challenge, a classification problem of a large database of images with more
than 1,000 prediction classes. Convolutional layers act as
local filters on an image, aggregating local information in
every special region. During learning, the weights of many
such filters are updated as the overall system learns to
recognize distinct features in the data, such as horizontal or
vertical lines, corners, and regions of similar contrast. LOBs
can be likened to images because they also contain local
information; for example, price and volume information at
each level of the book can be combined with adjacent levels
to automatically extract new features using convolutional

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

layers. Similarly, CNNs can learn local temporal information
by convolving order book states over the time dimension.
Building on this analogy between images and LOBs, the
state-of-the-art deep learning model DeepLOB (Zhang
et al. 2019a), which uses raw order book states directly as
inputs to the network, constitutes a new tool in the execution toolbox. This type of model currently provides the most
accurate short-term price signals, which can be used to
improve execution trajectories. To improve the robustness
of forecasts, DeepLOB can also be extended to perform
quantile regression on the forward return distribution
(Zhang, Zohren, and Roberts 2019b). To do this, the final
LSTM layer of the network is split into multiple separate
parallel parts for as many quantiles as should be forecast,
and each network branch uses a corresponding quantile
loss function. Quantile predictions can then be combined to
compute more robust point estimates and add a measure
of uncertainty and risk for the practitioner. Training separate
models for the bid and ask sides has the additional advantage of producing estimates of the market spread, which
can help in deciding the prices at which the order should
be placed and whether the spread should be crossed.
To improve the planning of an execution schedule, a pointin-time price forecast can be useful; ultimately, however,
a price path over the execution horizon would be more
beneficial for concrete planning. Using ideas from natural
language processing and machine translation, a sequenceto-sequence model with an attention mechanism can be
used to achieve such multihorizon return forecasts using
LOB data (Zhang and Zohren 2021). To translate written text
from one language to another, the idea of the sequence-tosequence model (Sutskever, Vinyals, and Le 2014) is to use
an LSTM encoder to learn a representation of a sentence as
a fixed-length vector and then use a separate LSTM-based
decoder to again translate this vector representation into
the target language. Adapting this idea to predict return
trajectories, the model in Zhang and Zohren (2021) uses
the DeepLOB network (Zhang et al. 2019a) as an encoder,
while an attention mechanism (Vaswani, Shazeer, Parmar,
Uszkoreit, Jones, Gomez, Kaiser, and Polosukhin 2017)
allows using selected hidden states of the encoder layers
in the decoding step, producing the forecast time series.
This way, the model drastically improves forecasting performance over longer time horizons as forecasts sequentially
build on each other in an autoregressive fashion.
Because deep learning models benefit from large amounts
of data, in the extreme case, models could even be trained
on market-by-order messages directly. Given that deep
order flow imbalance models already showed the advantage of this more stationary data source, using all the raw
data in a deep learning framework is a logical next step.

From Integrating Predictive
Signals into Execution
Algorithms to Automatically
Learning Policies Using
Reinforcement Learning
An execution strategy in an LOB market can be viewed as
essentially two dimensional. One dimension is how very
large order volumes are sliced up over time, while the
other dimension describes the prices at which slices are
placed in the order book. A simple TWAP strategy might, for
instance, split a large order uniformly over time and always
place marketable limit orders by crossing the spread (see
Exhibit 2). This would imply, however, that half the spread
is lost with every trade relative to the mid-price, incurring
slippage costs even if the mid-price stays constant over the
entire execution time. In contrast, placing trades passively
by using limit orders at the near touch (i.e., without crossing
the spread) has the opposite effect of earning half a spread
whenever a marketable order is placed in the opposing
direction. The downside of passive orders is that execution
is uncertain and depends on other market participants’
order flow and future price moves. Thus, if one had a directional signal of future prices, it would be sensible to deviate
from the simple TWAP strategy. For example, if the execution
task is to sell a block of shares, a favorable price signal
might indicate that the mid-price is expected to rise; hence,
a slice of the order could be placed more passively deeper in
the book (at a higher price), anticipating that a price swing

Exhibit 2. Simple TWAP Strategy
Traded Volume

ry

to

AP

r

tT

ge

r
Ta

c
aje

TW

t

T

Time

Note: This exhibit shows an illustration of an execution schedule
with a linear TWAP target trajectory and executed discrete slices
as blocks over time around the target trajectory.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

103

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

could complete the trade. If price forecasts point downward,
however, a market order could still make use of the higher
price by executing a slice before the move happens.
Using a combination of ML models, we can thus engineer
a complete execution strategy. An example algorithm
might work as follows. Volatility forecasts, obtained using
any method from historical averaging over generalized
autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH)
models to deep learning, can be used to schedule either
the time allowed for an execution ticket or the amount of
front-loading over a fixed time horizon by controlling how
execution slice sizes decrease over time. Using ML forecasts of trade volume, we can further modulate execution
schedules by proportionately changing future slice sizes
with expected volume forecasts. Predicted price paths can
then be used to fine-tune the strategy by varying placement levels (prices) dynamically. Should we expect a favorable price move, we would place a passive limit order in the
book at the first level—or even deeper into the book if the
expected price move is sufficiently large. Such a strategy
could be refined in various ways—for example, by using a
probabilistic level placement to increase the probability
of passive placements with more favorable price moves
and wider spread forecasts. A probabilistic strategy also
has the benefit of being less predictable by other market
participants, who might want to exploit the effect that
large orders have in moving the market.
Another ML approach encompassing the execution problem uses reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms to plan
the execution trajectory. RL—and especially deep RL using
deep neural networks—has been tremendously successful
in solving complex problems, from learning to play games
(Mnih, Kavukcuoglu, Silver, Graves, Antonoglou, Wierstra,
and Riedmiller 2013) to predicting three-dimensional protein structures from genomic data (Jumper, Evans, Pritzel,
Green, Figurnov, Ronneberger, Tunyasuvunakool, Bates,
Žídek, Potapenko, et al. 2021). In the execution context,
Ning, Lin, and Jaimungal (2021) describe a good example
using deep RL for optimal execution problems using double
Q-learning (Hasselt 2010), employing a modern algorithm
previously used to train autonomous agents to play Atari
games at a superhuman level from raw pixel input.
On a theoretical level, the execution problem can be
framed as a partially observable Markov decision process
(POMDP), which can be amenable to being solved using RL
algorithms. The RL learning paradigm works analogously
to biological learning processes in animals and humans.
The agent, our execution algorithm, interacts with a market
environment in state s, which describes all information
necessary to characterize the current state of the market,
by performing an action, a, thereby transitioning the state
to s' = T(s,a). The environment state is further assumed to

104

CFA Institute Research Foundation

satisfy the Markov property, which means that past states
do not add any further relevant information for the future.
The agent, however, perceives not the entire state of the
world but only an observation, o’ = obs(s’), and hence does
usually not know the underlying state exactly. In addition
to the new observation o’ at each step, the learner also
receives a reward signal, r. Based on the reward signal, the
RL algorithm learns over time which sequence of actions
leads to the highest expected cumulative rewards.
Observational features for the RL algorithm might include
various data from the LOB, including such handcrafted features as order flow imbalance and order book imbalance,
or even specific model predictions, such as future price
paths, spreads, or volatility. In the extreme case, using
deep RL can help one even learn policies directly from raw
order book data. Rewards in this scenario are usually based
on incurred slippage during training.
A difficulty in real-world RL applications is that training the
algorithm necessarily must be done in a simulated environment. The most basic kind of “simulator” simply uses
historical market prices. This approach limits the action
space to timing market orders, because past prices alone
cannot determine whether a limit order would have been
executed or not. Another shortcoming of relying solely on
historical prices for simulation is that trades do not generate any market impact, because neither do they take away
liquidity in the book nor can they cause any other market
participant to react to the trade. To alleviate the latter problem, simulation environments are sometimes enhanced
with stochastic models of price impact to represent more
realistic costs of aggressive trading. Another approach to
help with the former problem of handling limit orders is to
model the environment as a complete market replay using
market-by-order data. This way, new market or even limit
orders can be injected into the historical order flow. This
approach accurately handles how the order would have
been executed at the time.
However, this alone does not solve the problem of counterfactual behavior by other agents. For example, if one of
our orders is executed, it might imply that someone else’s
order was not executed. They then might have placed
another order at a different price; however, this is not represented in the historical data. One approach to handle these
counterfactual scenarios is agent-based modeling, which
represents individual traders explicitly in a simulation.
These simulated agents follow their own trading strategies
and can react to changes in the market caused by our
execution algorithm, as well as to actions and reactions of
other agents. Capturing realistic trading behavior remains
a challenging task, and building realistic LOB models is the
subject of active research.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Conclusion
How large trades are optimally executed depends on the
details of a market’s microstructure environment. We have
described price–time priority LOB markets, because this is
the most common market design at major exchanges trading cash equities, futures, and options. Limit order books
thus provide a wealth of high-frequency data that can be
used for developing data-driven execution algorithms using
ML methods. LOB data can be used to engineer informative
features for the prediction of a range of relevant variables:
spreads, trade volume, volatility, and even short-term price
movements (fast alpha signals). Separate ML models, each
predicting a different variable, can then be combined into a
sophisticated execution algorithm that plans an execution
trajectory in both the volume and placement level (price)
dimension.
The trend in ML research more generally points in the
direction of using growing computer resources to further
automate feature extraction from raw data instead of
relying on handcrafted features. The DeepLOB model from
Zhang et al. (2019a) and further models building on it are
good examples demonstrating that this trend also holds in
finance and particularly for trade execution. Given expansive LOB datasets and current computer power, deep learning models are already outperforming simpler models in
many tasks, such as generating fast alpha signals. Taking
trade automation a step further, RL offers an appealing
framework to reduce slippage costs by letting an execution
algorithm learn to take optimal actions directly. Actions can
be defined on varying levels of abstraction—from choosing
parameters in an existing execution algorithm dynamically
to placing trades outright. The research outlook in ML for
execution shows a path toward more complete end-to-end
execution systems using more advanced deep learning
and (deep) RL algorithms and architectures, improving
predictive performance while maintaining critical issues,
such as model robustness.

References
Almgren, Robert, and Neil Chriss. 2000. “Optimal Execution
of Portfolio Transactions.” Journal of Risk 3 (2): 5–39.
Cartea, Álvaro, and Sebastian Jaimungal. 2016. “A ClosedForm Execution Strategy to Target Volume Weighted
Average Price.” SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics
7 (1): 760–85.
Cont, Rama, Arseniy Kukanov, and Sasha Stoikov. 2014.
“The Price Impact of Order Book Events.” Journal of Financial
Econometrics 12 (1): 47–88.
Hasselt, Hado. 2010. “Double Q-Learning.” In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 23 (NIPS 2010),

edited by J. Lafferty, C. Williams, J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel,
and A. Culotta. https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2010/
hash/091d584fced301b442654dd8c23b3fc9-Abstract.
html.
Jumper, J., R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov,
O. Ronneberger, K. Tunyasuvunakool, R. Bates,
A. Žídek, A. Potapenko, et al. 2021. “Highly Accurate Protein
Structure Prediction with AlphaFold.” Nature 596: 583–89.
Kato, Takashi. 2015. “VWAP Execution as an Optimal
Strategy.” JSIAM Letters 7: 33–36.
Kolm, Petter, Jeremy Turiel, and Nicholas Westray. 2021.
“Deep Order Flow Imbalance: Extracting Alpha at Multiple
Horizons from the Limit Order Book.” Working paper
(5 August). Available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
papers.cfm?abstract_id=3900141.
Krizhevsky, A., I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. 2012.
“ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional
Neural Networks.” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 25 (NIPS 2012), edited by F. Pereira,
C. J. Burges, L. Bottou, and K. Q. Weinberger. https://
papers.nips.cc/paper/2012/hash/c399862d3b9d6b76c8436e924a68c45b-Abstract.html.
Mnih, V., K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou,
D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller. 2013. “Playing Atari with Deep
Reinforcement Learning.” NIPS Deep Learning Workshop
2013. Cornell University, arXiv:1312.5602 (19 December).
https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602.
Ning, Brian, Franco Ho Ting Lin, and Sebastian Jaimungal.
2021. “Double Deep Q-Learning for Optimal Execution.”
Applied Mathematical Finance 28 (4): 361–80.
Sutskever, Ilya, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V. Le. 2014.
“Sequence to Sequence Learning with Neural Networks.”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27
(NIPS 2014), edited by Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes,
N. Lawrence, and K.Q. Weinberger. https://papers.nips.
cc/paper/2014/hash/a14ac55a4f27472c5d894ec1c3c743d2-Abstract.html.
Szegedy, C., W. Liu, Y. Jia, P. Sermanet, S. Reed, D.
Anguelov, D. Erhan, V. Vanhoucke, and A. Rabinovich. 2015.
“Going Deeper with Convolutions.” Proceedings of the
2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition.
Vaswani, A., N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones,
A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin. 2017. “Attention Is
All You Need.” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 30 (NIPS 2017), edited by I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg,
S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and
R. Garnett. https://papers.nips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Abstract.html.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

105

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Zhang, Zihao, Stefan Zohren, and Stephen Roberts. 2019a.
“DeepLOB: Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Limit
Order Books.” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing
67 (11): 3001–12.
Zhang, Zihao, Stefan Zohren, and Stephen Roberts. 2019b.
“Extending Deep Learning Models for Limit Order Books to
Quantile Regression.” Time Series Workshop of the 36th
International Conference on Machine Learning. Cornell
University, arXiv:1906.04404 (11 June). https://arxiv.org/
abs/1906.04404.

106

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Zhang, Zihao, and Stefan Zohren. 2021. “Multi-Horizon
Forecasting for Limit Order Books: Novel Deep Learning
Approaches and Hardware Acceleration Using Intelligent
Processing Units.” Cornell University, arXiv:2105.10430
(27 August). https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.10430.

HANDBOOK OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
AND BIG DATA APPLICATIONS IN
INVESTMENTS

IV. CHATBOT, KNOWLEDGE GRAPHS,
AND AI INFRASTRUCTURE

This book can be found at cfainstitute.org/ai-and-big-data

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

9. INTELLIGENT CUSTOMER SERVICE IN FINANCE
Xu Liang, PhD
Chief Engineer, Ping An OneConnect

Development of AI-Enabled
Intelligent Customer Service
in the Financial Industry
The ubiquitous penetration of internet and big data applications has led to tremendous changes in consumers’
behavior patterns and lifestyles, raising the expectations
and requirements for financial services while steering service channels and models toward greater personalization.
However, the traditional IT plus human customer service
model can barely cope with the expanding user scale and
service needs that have become increasingly diversified
and fragmented. This situation intensifies the conflict
between the limited availability of human customer services
and massive volumes of customer inquiries and service
needs. Financial institutions continue to add customer service positions, but the customer service function frequently
falls into the operational trap of sharp increases in labor
costs, fragmentation of user needs, and lower service satisfaction (Liping 2018). There is a pressing need for financial
institutions to convert their customer service systems into
intelligent digital systems to improve customer service
responsiveness, optimize service experience, and at the
same time, reduce costs and boost efficiency.
With the development of a new generation of intelligent
technologies, intelligent customer service systems powered by artificial intelligence (AI) technologies, such as big
data analysis, knowledge engineering, machine learning
(ML), and intelligent voice, can build the bridge to interact
with those using media, such as text, voice, and images,
as well as to assist in human conversations, quality inspection, and business processing and, in turn, to lower the
manpower costs for financial institutions and improve their
service response efficiency. Compared with traditional
customer service systems, AI-driven intelligent customer
service offers significant advantages in various dimensions—such as channels, efficiency, and data—driving customer service centers to shift to a digital operation model
powered by AI (Yuan 2021). Besides addressing the pain
points of traditional customer service, AI-based intelligent
customer service also helps financial institutions build
closed-loop data value chains that enable the monetization

1

of data and accelerate their transition to become smarter
digital enterprises.1
On the one hand, the intelligent and digital transformation
of customer service will significantly improve companies’
operational efficiency and reduce costs to enhance cost
efficiency. Intelligent customer service empowers enterprises to better identify the true needs of customers,
leading to a more efficient allocation of customer service
resources that improves business processing efficiency
and reduces manpower costs. In addition, companies can
upgrade their products and services according to customer
requirements obtained from customer insights to boost a
company’s profitability.
On the other hand, intelligent customer service will offer
better user experience, enhance a company’s reputation,
increase user satisfaction, and create a differentiated
brand image in its role to reinforce positive incentives in
both directions. Intelligent customer service can support
omni-channel services, satisfy customer inquiries anytime
and anywhere, offer customers a personalized service
experience, and improve customer satisfaction. Moreover,
an increase in user recommendations generated from
improvements in digital service capabilities will help build
the brand image and strengthen the brand’s competitiveness. According to a McKinsey survey conducted in 2019
(Breuer, Fanderl, Hedwig, and Meuer 2020), user recommendations of banks increased significantly with improvements in the banks’ digital service capabilities. Companies
in the financial industry that have improved their digital
service capabilities are more likely to receive a higher level
of user recommendations when compared to other industries (see Exhibit 1).
The COVID-19 pandemic has further spurred the transformation of financial services to a new online and contactless service mode. This creates an unprecedented
development opportunity for intelligent customer service
centers, and the outlook for the global intelligent customer
service market is rosy. The market size of global intelligent contact centers was USD1.07 billion in 2019 and
is expected to grow at a compound annual growth rate
(CAGR) of 36.45% from 2023 to 2028).2

This information came from DBS Bank’s Marketplace website: www.dbs.com.sg/personal/marketplace/ (accessed 15 June 2020).

For more information, see the Mordor Intelligence report titled “Intelligent Virtual Assistant (IVA) Market—Growth, Trends, COVID-19 Impact, and
Forecasts (2023–2028)”: www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/intelligent-virtual-assistant-market?gclid=EAIaIQobChMI9Ki1i-nf_
QIVuxCtBh1ZdARcEAAYASAAEgJGovD_BwE.
2

108

CFA Institute Research Foundation

© 2023 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 1. Relationship between Customers’ Willingness to Recommend
a Service Provider and Digital Service Capabilities in Various Industries
9.00

8.00

Customer
Willingness to
Recommend
Service
7.00
Provider
Scale: 0–10

6.00

5.00
20

30

Mobile Providers

40

50
60
70
Availability of Digital Services (%)

Energy Providers

Banking

80

Health Insurance

90

Car Insurance

Source: Breuer et al. (2020).

The intelligent customer service industry and market in China
are also booming. According to a survey by Frost & Sullivan
China, the market size of China’s intelligent customer service
industry in 2020 was RMB3.01 billion, growing at an explosive rate of 88.1% year over year. As intelligence continues
to make headway in the industry, the market size of China’s
intelligent customer service industry will proliferate in the
next five years and is projected to reach RMB10.25 billion in
2025 (as shown in Exhibit 2), representing a projected CAGR
of 35.8% from 2020 to 2025 (Yuan 2021).
The intelligent customer service industry is clearly experiencing a rapid growth with huge demand. Intelligent
customer service systems will bring more value to financial institutions and strengthen their competitiveness.
Currently, the industry is at the crossroads of divergence
and reshuffling as giant players begin to emerge. Intelligent
customer service is reshaping the value of the customer
service center, transforming it from a cost driver to a value
driver. The onset of the 5G era also brought new opportunities for the industry. Real-time interoperability, interconnection of all things, and innovative intelligent customer
service application scenarios and formats combine to
make real-time and intuitive interactive dialogue the goal

and development direction for future R&D in intelligent
customer service.
No matter where the financial institutions are in their digital
transformation stage, the overall landscape of the financial
industry has been fundamentally altered by the COVID-19
pandemic. In the future, financial institutions will have to
compete and win in new ways.
The COVID-19 pandemic will have a far-reaching impact
on future financial services in several aspects, including customer behavior, products and services, business
operations (front-/middle-/back-office), operating models,
external cooperation, and working methods.
•

As digital channels become the “basic offering,”
financial institutions must innovate to create
unique customer service experiences.
As the COVID-19 pandemic accelerates the digitalization of front-office functions, customer experience differentiation in such areas as online account
opening and login, one-click loan underwriting, and
remote claim settlement will form the new fundamental requirements for customer service. Investment in
CFA Institute Research Foundation

109

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 2. China’s Intelligent Customer Service Market Size, 2019–2025E
Renminbi (100 millions)
120
102.5
100

95.0

80

11.4

10.4

7.6

12.3
8.2

7.0

66.7
8.0

60
48.7
40

69.5

3.6

2.4

76.0

82.0

53.4
39.0

1.9

1.3

5.3

5.8
3.9

30.1
16.0

20

86.9

24.1
12.8
0
2019

2020

2021E
Software Output

2022E

2023E

Hardware Output

2024E

2025E

Support Service Output

Source: Yuan (2021).

these areas may be the key for financial institutions
to attract and retain their customers. To establish a
differentiated value proposition, financial institutions
can further explore products and services that meet
customers’ non-financial needs. In the case of banks
in Asia, DBS Bank’s Marketplace platform allows customers to search for, buy, and sell properties and cars;
book their trips; and even compare and switch their
payment plans for utilities (water and electricity).3
These trends are apparent in both retail and corporate
financial services, and financial institutions have to
adjust their value proposition accordingly.
Likewise, the “last mile” of digital services may be the
next arena as financial institutions strive to offer more
personal and human digital interactions. To this end,
financial institutions need to use more data to better
understand their customers in order to deliver products that meet customer needs via the right channel
at the right time.
Furthermore, even as financial institutions directly
assign more control to customers with digital capabilities and self-service capabilities, there is still a
need to maintain the human experience with branch

3

offices and call centers. Once viewed as a traditional
solution, call centers are now becoming more important. In addition, financial institutions should speed
up the transformation of their branches to achieve a
balance between supply and demand. New concepts
and automatic teller machines (ATMs) with more
autonomy offering the suite of legacy services and
functions that was previously exclusive to branches
may emerge, business outlets may be further integrated, and full-service branches may be reorganized
to become specialized consulting centers.
•

A focus on service costs will be key to adapting to
the new industrial economy and surviving difficult
times.
The recent market contractions are likely to continue.
With additional pressure on profits, digital transformation may become an important means to improve
efficiency and optimize costs. According to recent surveys by the European Central Bank (ECB), the average
cost-to-income ratio for digital-only banks is 47%, well
below the average for smaller banks (73%). Although
digital-only banks are in the early stages of development, the difference in this ratio also highlights the

For more information, go to the platform’s website: www.dbs.com.sg/personal/marketplace/.

110

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

many cost advantages that full digitalization can bring
(Deloitte 2020).
For traditional financial institutions, bridging the technology gap aggressively will significantly improve
long-term operational efficiency and accelerate
industry modernization and digitization (such as
public cloud and AI). Technology investments may
be more challenging in the macro business and
economic environment, but in the long run, the elimination of structural costs through comprehensive
digital transformation will be important for traditional
financial institutions as they compete with digitally
savvy newcomers. To achieve this outcome, traditional
financial institutions have to look beyond conventional
investment horizon preferences (i.e., more than three
to five years).
To sum up, despite an unknown future fraught with uncertainty, the development trend of the financial services
industry that will follow the end of the COVID-19 pandemic
has already been set in motion. Over the next year, financial
institutions will have the unique opportunity in the retail
and small business spaces to build trust and loyalty among
customers by being responsive to customer needs and
providing quality services.
To this end, financial institutions have to align the services
they offer with the current situation and accelerate their
digital and intelligent development with a sense of urgency.
Most importantly, however, they need to better adapt to
customer needs. Customer trust and loyalty (and even willingness to share data) will come and go depending on how
well the financial institutions build trust and loyalty.

Classification and Typical
Application Scenarios
of AI-Based Intelligent
Customer Service in the
Financial Industry
With the rapid development of fintech in China, the penetration rate of intelligent customer service in the financial
industry continues to rise. The key role of intelligent customer
service is to assist human operators and take over repetitive
basic inquiries to free up manpower. However, problems
related to specialized topics often require an intervention
involving both intelligent and human customer services.

Classification
Based on the specific customer service duties, intelligent
customer service can be divided into three types: service
oriented, investment advisory, and outbound.

Service-oriented customer service
Service-oriented customer service applies natural language
understanding formed from training with a large corpus
and develops context models according to specific business scenarios to conduct a natural dialogue and question-and-answer session with users. It fulfills the service
requirements for a natural dialogue and addresses the
customer’s service needs in general scenarios, such as
account top-up and transfer, as well as business issues.
The service is the most common basic application scenario
of intelligent customer service in the banking industry.
Currently, financial institutions in China have adopted
such technology in PCs and mobile terminals. On the one
hand, service-oriented customer service can automatically
answer many repetitive basic inquiries to relieve the work
pressure of human agents to a great extent. On the other
hand, it can respond quickly to customer needs as soon
as the user encounters a problem, making it convenient
for customers to seek solutions, which promotes service
satisfaction.
As AI technology progresses, service-oriented customer
service will continue to improve in terms of recognition
accuracy and diversity of responses to user inquiries and
even provide different answers according to different services and scenarios. For example, the Ping An Pocket Bank
app can provide targeted answers to inquiries based on the
type of bank card held by the customer. This capability further bolsters service quality and user satisfaction.

Investment advisory customer service
As the Chinese economy has continued to develop, disposable income per capita has gradually increased, and
beyond the expenses to fulfill basic daily living needs, the
demand for asset appreciation has intensified. Investment
advisory customer service has emerged to meet the
investment and wealth management needs of financial
customers. It can use algorithms and wealth management
know-how to analyze users according to different risk preferences, expectations on returns, and investment directions and match users with various products offered by
financial institutions. Users get investment recommendations on the type, scale, and timing of investment products,
and the system also tracks the customer’s investment
returns to adjust such investment recommendations
accordingly. Today, more and more financial institutions
are deploying investment advisory customer services.
Companies can use relevant codes developed on mobile
terminals to allow investors to conveniently access investment advice and analysis reports on their mobile phones.
As AI technology continues to advance, there will be further
improvements in the capabilities of investment advisory
customer service to offer a better service experience to
financial customers.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

111

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Outbound customer service

Insurance

Strong demand for telemarketing in the banking industry
coupled with the need to curtail rising manpower and operating costs translate to increasing demand for outbound
customer service. The conventional outbound customer service has to deal with not only manpower cost constraints
but also extensive training for the agents, which drains a lot
of resources. Moreover, data have demonstrated that the
success rate of traditional telemarketing is relatively low.
With technology advancements, the banking industry has
initiated many studies on intelligent outbound customer
service. The service can verify the user identity and, at the
same time, provide users with simple feedback and guidance to complete the relevant sales and marketing process.
Continuous technology optimization enables outbound
customer service to gradually strengthen language skills,
allowing it to offer the same dialogue capability and service
experience as human agents and handle tasks that were
originally performed by humans to save the related costs.

Insurance is a relatively complex business; every user has
unique requirements from insurance purchase to claims.
Therefore, the insurance industry has relatively high
requirements on the intelligence level of the intelligent
customer service, which has a direct impact on customer
satisfaction, retention, and conversion.

Typical Use Cases
Intelligent customer service is mainly applied in two scenarios: presales services and after-sales services. Presales
services are mainly deployed in telemarketing scenarios
and used to improve call efficiency, data security, and service quality control. After-sales services are mainly for customer consultation and service callbacks, and the key is to
meet the accuracy requirements of outbound products.

By sector
Different sectors in the financial industry, such as insurance, banking, internet finance, and securities, have varying requirements for intelligent customer service due to
their inherent business characteristics (see Exhibit 3).

Banking
The main banking applications are in handling highly
repetitive queries, providing response services during
peak periods, and providing intelligent collection services.
Intelligent customer service mainly assists human customer service agents and frees up manpower during peak
periods.

Fintech
Similar to banks, customer service in the fintech industry
has to deal with a large volume of repetitive inquires, so
intelligent customer service is mainly deployed to handle
highly repetitive queries, with the intelligence focused
on such areas as intelligent debt collection and smart
marketing.

Securities
As with the banking industry, customer service in the
securities industry also has to deal with a large volume of
repetitive basic inquiries. Here, intelligent customer service is mainly used to address inquiries on basic problems
in the securities sector, with the intelligence applied in
smart stock selection and analysis, as well as smart push
services.

Exhibit 3. Application and Business Scenarios of Intelligent Customer Service
in Various Financial Sectors
Insurance
Enquiries on insurance-related
issues such as insurance
purchase are relatively complex,
and the level of intelligent service
will affect customer retention and
conversion.

Internet Finance
Similar to banking, the main
application is in handling highly
repetitive inquiries. Intelligence is
focused on intelligent collection
and smart marketing.

112

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Banking
The main applications are in
handling highly repetitive queries,
providing response services during
peak periods, and supplying intelligent
collection services.

Securities
It is mainly used to address inquiries
on basic problems in the securities
sector, with the intelligence applied in
smart stock selection and analysis, as
well as smart push services.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Within sectors
Within sectors (in banking, for example), the application scenarios of AI can be divided into the following
six categories.

Robots in intelligent voice navigation
and service scenarios
Application concept: To the extent that customers are
receptive to robots, voice robots are used in navigation and
service scenarios to improve service quality, reduce costs,
and improve efficiency.
Today, applications using intelligent voice navigation robots
have matured and are widely adopted by large banks.
However, it is still possible to further expand the application
of this technology. In terms of intelligent voice applications,
due consideration should be taken to incorporate customer
complaints, customer acceptance, and scene adaptability.
Aggregate analysis based on the two dimensions of customer attributes and scene responsibility should be carried
out to identify the most suitable business scenarios for
robot applications and the type of customers who are most
receptive to robots. Robots can be gradually introduced to
eventually encompass all scenarios to reduce costs and
improve efficiency. At the same time, customers’ acceptance of robots has to be examined for service quality.

Smart identity verification with voiceprint
Application concept: Reduce costs and mitigate risks by
using voiceprint to identify customers to reduce verification time, shorten the overall call duration, and retrieve
historical recordings to identify counterfeit and fraudulent
voiceprints.
Currently, the application scenarios and technical practice
are still being developed for this technology. The recommended approach is to supplement the identity verification
process with voiceprint technology when the service is
being performed. With the permission of the customer, a
customer voiceprint record is established that will be used
together with other identification techniques to seamlessly
verify the customer’s identity for any incoming service
request or inquiry from the customer. This will promptly
identify incoming calls from parties impersonating the customer while reducing the time taken to verify the customer’s identity to improve the customer experience.

Currently, this application technology and scenario have
already matured, but there is still room for enhanced
technology empowerment. An offline quality inspection
system is suitable for service optimization. Once a customer problem is found, the offline quality inspection model
can quickly locate similar problems in the database and
determine the appropriate improvements. Real-time quality inspection is suitable for correcting customer service
habits. It monitors the dialogue process between the customer service agents and customers, identifies the problems, and provides feedback promptly to correct mistakes
by the customer service agents.

Intelligent human–machine collaboration
Application concept: Reduce costs and improve efficiency
by analyzing the interaction linkages of the scenarios in the
process flow and select business scenarios that can be
substituted by robots.
The specifications for such applications are currently
being developed. To engage customers using a mix of
robot outbound call and human collaboration, start from
the business operation process, subdivide the key interaction links of all scenarios in the end-to-end process, as
well as the characteristics of customers who called, and
match with the robot capabilities one by one to select the
business scenarios and customer types that the robots
can serve to improve customer satisfaction and business
conversion rates.

Online service and sales
Application concept: Based on the text robot or chatbot,
online service and sales use big data analysis and product
configuration to recommend interactions for the center.
It provides precise recommendations on touch points to
complete service and offers sales and operations with
better performance and precision—and thus manages
to improve user experience and contributes to business
indicators.
Customer centers and remote banks have higher requirements for text robots. The systems should be designed for
flexibility to offer more diversity in service formats and facilitate operations and maintenance for greater convenience
and speed. The goal is to achieve rapid coverage of service
channels (such as WeChat, Weibo, and TikTok) and build
capabilities to integrate services with marketing efforts.

Intelligent quality inspection

Smart knowledge management

Application concept: Improve cost efficiency by substituting labor with quality inspection robots to perform objective and comprehensive inspections, reduce the need for
manual and repeated playing of recordings, and pinpoint
problems quickly.

Application concept: Establish a knowledge management
platform that supports all channels (agents, robots, customers), forming a centralized maintenance system to
reduce repeated purchases and investments as well as to
cut costs and improve efficiency.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

113

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 4. Intelligent Customer Service Architecture for the Financial Domain
Customer service
system composition

Functional
module

Multiple rounds of Q&A
Building a knowledge map
Smart recommendation

Smart question answering system

Interaction module

Knowledge map maintenance

H5 page display
Knowledge map visualization
Self-service queries
Smart replies

Back-office monitoring
management

The application should standardize the method used to
organize the knowledge based on the service characteristics and scope, guiding each department to break down
the knowledge systematically to implement the fragmentation, structuring, and labeling of scenario-based knowledge
content.

Building a Financial Intelligent
Customer Service Process
The development of financial intelligent customer service
often requires the active participation of business analysts
and implementation personnel in the early stage, online
optimization of the customer service system, in-depth
access to the businesses, and the organization of the
business processes and user inquiry scenarios for a tight
integration of the business and intelligent customer service
functions with customizable configuration for the processes. The development of a financial intelligent customer
service system can be divided into two parts: system construction and operation optimization.

System Construction
Before a financial institution builds an intelligent customer
service system, first it needs to define the architecture of
such a system by organizing the structure of the system
and clarifying the composition, functional modules, and
business applications that must be supported for the
system. After which, it can carry out the work to implement
the customer service system by technological means.

114

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Financial
applications
Smart credit risk control
Smart wealth management
recommendation
Smart transaction
processing
Smart scenario display
Smart knowledge inquiry
Smart
pre-/mid-/after-sales

……

……

The intelligent customer service architecture for the
financial domain is shown in Exhibit 4.
Currently, the intelligent customer service architecture for
the Financial Domain consists of at least five components:
interactions, graph construction, knowledge graph maintenance, intelligent Q&A, and back-office management. More
functional modules can be derived from the interactions
module, such as multiple rounds of Q&A, smart recommendation, H5 page display, knowledge graph visualization,
self-service queries, and intelligent replies. Corresponding
intelligent financial applications can be derived from a
combination of various functions and embedded interactive formats, and these include applications for credit risk
control, financial management advice, business processing, scenario display, knowledge search, presales, sales,
and postsales.
The deployment modes for intelligent customer service
include public cloud, hybrid cloud, and private deployment. The main differences between the three modes are
reflected in such areas as data privacy, construction cost,
and deployment cycles. Different modes meet the needs of
different customers.
Of the three modes, deployment using the public cloud
has the lowest construction cost and shortest deployment
cycle, which is suitable for SMEs (small and midsize enterprises) that want to quickly build their intelligent customer
service capabilities. On-premise deployment requires enterprises to establish their own technical teams; although
the construction cost is high, such a deployment greatly
enhances data privacy and security, which are suitable

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

for large enterprises. A hybrid cloud deployment combines
the characteristics of the previous two deployment methods. Although it uses the public cloud platform, the data
are stored locally, and such a deployment may become
the mainstream deployment mode for intelligent customer
service in the future. Currently, on-premises deployment
is still the market mainstream, but cloud deployment is
increasingly favored by the market owing to its low cost,
fast deployment, and agile iteration.

be derived from operating the intelligent customer service product, helping financial institutions gain a true
understanding of AI so that they can leverage AI in intelligent customer service to achieve the twin goals of cost
reduction and higher efficiency.

An excellent intelligent customer service system should
have expertise in knowledge graph as its basis, supplemented by advanced speech semantic recognition and
understanding technologies to deliver an outstanding interactive experience. At the same time, it can fulfill as many
business functions as possible and enable access to the
capabilities of many platforms and many channels so as
to quickly deploy customer service capabilities in different
business environments and support a variety of financial
scenarios.

Financial institutions’ diverse needs in serving their customers are increasingly met by a slew of AI-integrated
applications merging voice products with AI technology.

Operational Optimization
An intelligent customer service system is not built overnight. Many financial institutions are not able to achieve
the business results that their intelligent customer service
systems were projected to deliver after the systems were
built or purchased. A major reason is that financial institutions’ operational processes are generally not designed
with intelligent customer service in mind and are not able
to optimize and improve their services. A good intelligent
customer service system is often the result of cooperation
between products and business personnel.
The intelligent customer service product has to be supported by cumulative business expertise and experience in
AI technology. Business operators need to listen to service
voice recordings to understand recent user demands and
be familiar with the business. They also need to be familiar
with various channels, have an acute business sense,
maintain communication with business departments, and
understand the current business, the drivers behind the
business, and the development trend of the business. They
also need to acquire and constantly update their business
knowledge and adjust the corpus in time to ensure that
the customer service products can meet evolving business
needs. At the same time, operators need to leverage business data to uncover existing problems in products or new
demands in the industry and constantly iterate the intelligence level of the intelligent customer service system to
improve the service capability to address inquiries.
A good vendor for intelligent customer service products,
besides having advanced technologies, should also have
extensive industry experience and a standard training
and certification system to help financial institutions build
an intelligent customer service system that consists of
not just the hardware but also the soft power that can

Financial AI Customer
Service Case Studies

Inbound Call Middle Office
Companies face many challenges in building their own AI
products, such as repetitive development efforts, the pace
of adoption not keeping up with business needs, and poor
robot performance. Inbound call middle-office solutions can
help enterprises build intelligent customer service systems
faster and better by addressing these issues.
The middle-office solutions have proven effective in training new customer service agents and adapting existing
AI solutions for new business. On the back end, these
middle-office solutions can connect with and manage AI
engines, such as natural language understanding (NLU)
and voice recognition robots, from many vendors. Similarly,
on the front end, they can accommodate inbound inquiries
from multiple channels, such as phones or PCs. They also
offer extensive business solution modules and allow clients
to quickly build on their existing capabilities and adapt to
changing business needs.
In one case, OneConnect’s Gamma Mid-Office Voice Access
helped a large Chinese bank simultaneously launch an
intelligent assistant and an intelligent tutor within one
month. The solution adopted the same underlying engine to
offer two products with a one-time development effort. By
resetting a variety of robot rules, the solution enabled the
robots to fulfill new business scenario requirements, distinguish between scenarios, and accommodate the needs for
both scenarios.

Intelligent Outbound Call
Traditional customer service has drawbacks, such as substantial manpower investment, long training duration, poor
work efficiency, performance improvement challenges,
and complex data analysis. There are three major customer
service pain points in the industry. The first is business
reminders. Financial institutions have a need for a lot of
information synchronization and business reminders, such
as credit card payment reminders and reminders about
dues for financial products. Sending manual reminders
will occupy 40% of the daily working hours of an operator
CFA Institute Research Foundation

115

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

and usually involves repetitive tasks that lead to low work
enthusiasm and worsening customer experience. The
second pain point is financial collection. Take the credit
industry as an example. Every year, about 70% of overdue
accounts could be attributed to account holders who
forgot their repayments, and most of these amounts could
be recovered after manual reminders and notifications are
sent. However, manual collection is time consuming, with
low work efficiency and poor time utilization. The third is
active marketing, where sales personnel often have to filter
through a massive number of leads for financial products,
especially insurance products, which is a time-consuming
and labor-intensive task that tends to undermine sales
confidence. The inconsistent grading of customer intentions and the loss of high-quality customer leads are two
problems that result in the low efficiency and high cost of
active marketing.

5.

Customer service will conduct additional data analysis
and clearly present several data indicators to help
analyze the call performance and customers’ behavior.

6.

Lastly, customer service will automatically optimize
itself, apply deep learning, and continuously add to the
corpus to improve its Q&A performance.

The pain points in the previous scenarios call for an intelligent outbound call solution. With the call center system
as the base, one such solution layers on a number of AI
technologies, such as natural language processing (NLP),
speech recognition, and speech synthesis, replacing
manual calls with intelligent outbound robots to screen
intended customers, target customers, and accurately
classify different customers. By effectively reducing headcount, the product helps companies improve the customer
experience and increase their marketing efficiency as it
steers communications with customers toward greater
professionalism, automation, and efficiency. In actual
operations, the results are promising.

In investment advisory, the system automatically answers
questions about loans and insurance, intelligently analyzes
customer needs, assists in drafting optimal investment
plans, and addresses after-sales questions.

The specific process of an outbound robot is as follows:
1.

First, the customers may call customer service, which
is available 24/7. The efficiency is high, service availability is long, and incoming customer inquiries can be
attended to at anytime and anywhere.

2.

The customer service function will then respond intelligently, and supported by automated speech recognition (ASR), NLP, and text-to-speech (TTS) technologies,
the robot can understand and respond to inquiries. In
short, the intelligent customer service can identify the
user’s question, match the corresponding answer from
the database, and provide the answer automatically.

3.

The intelligent customer service then automatically
classifies users according to the contents of the call,
helping companies accurately target customers and
acquire a better understanding of the customer’s
inquiry and pain points.

4.

In addition, during this process, customer service will
record the dialogue and store the complete recording
and dialogue text, making it convenient to view and
track the conversation. Furthermore, the complete dialogue recording is collected and trained by AI to further
iterate and upgrade the AI products.

116

CFA Institute Research Foundation

In marketing, the system leverages big data to generate
a 360-degree customer profile, locate target customer
groups, and predict the customer’s propensity with respect
to loans, wealth management, and insurance products.
When appropriate, the system can initiate conversations.
In risk management, the system collects user data for antifraud surveillance and to assess borrowers’ willingness
and ability to repay before the due date. Voice data are also
collected to predict the repayment risk.

For notifications, it provides timely payment reminders,
personalized communication playbooks, multidimensional
configuration logic trees, and intelligent external collection.
In internal and external customer service scenarios, the
applications include external marketing to customers, collection, credit checks, internal employee inquiry hotlines,
and outbound calls for surveys.
Such systems have proven to be highly valuable in production environments. As an example, a system developed by
Ping An OneConnect significantly improved the response
rate when used in promoting a new loan product that is
part of Ping An’s inclusive financial service offerings. Prior
to the robot deployment, the outbound call capacity of the
customer service center was about 150 calls per person per
day, which did not meet customer demand during peak marketing periods. In terms of performance, the inquiry rate was
only about 1% for customers in the first follow-up and about
5% by the fifth follow-up. The operating cost of the marketing outbound call center remained high, at RMB150 per customer after apportionment. After the robot was deployed, the
call center achieved an average daily outbound call capacity
of 1 million, with a 5% marketing response rate, while the
outbound marketing cost for the same batch of customers
was reduced to under RMB1 per customer. When used for
loan collection, the robot can make about 900–1,000 calls
a day to owners of overdue accounts, and it increased the
repayment rate by 30% within a week.

Text Robots
In the past, AI customer service suffered from business
pain points, such as low Q&A accuracy, support for only

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

a single round of Q&A, inability to conduct business processing, and high knowledge base maintenance costs.
The latest solutions use a more advanced NLP algorithm to
gain deep semantic understanding and perform semantic
analysis of the context, enabling robots to conduct multiple rounds of dialogue with users. These solutions may
also adopt unsupervised ML and supervised ML to minimize maintenance costs and keep the knowledge base
up to date.

Business characteristics
•

Full coverage of customer service marketing scenarios: WeChat, official account, Weibo, H5, web, and
other omni-channel coverage; Q&A scenarios involving
presales, current selling processes, and after sales.
The PaaS platform design facilitates business system
connection, offering 24/7 high-quality service.

•

Leverage on Ping An Group’s years of industry experience: The system has a comprehensive knowledge
base that includes knowledge about finance, banks,
and smart cities, which empowers it to provide data
support for algorithms and to quantify operational
indicators.

•

Advanced technology: 100% owned intellectual property rights with an average accuracy of 85% that offers
outstanding performance and high availability and is
scalable and secure.

Business process
•

•

•

Cloud/on-premises deployment: The cloud version
allows for quick access at a reasonable cost, allowing
users to rapidly deploy intelligent Q&A, whereas the
on-premises deployment offers better security and
business privacy for the business environment.
Knowledge configuration/model training: Data modules such as FAQ, dynamic menu, simple tasks, hot
topics, and welcome messages are configured in the
knowledge base, offering a set of rich content with
diverse functions, while Q&A accuracy is validated by
model training and running tests.
System use: The system is used in intelligent robot
Q&A, provision of various data reports for post-loan
management, and optimization of the model for
education quality inspection and marking.

Business functions
•

Powerful Q&A capabilities: The text robot system can
answer questions accurately, achieve accurate contextual understanding of speech, and easily handle
complex interactive questions; in addition, one Q&A
portal can support seamless switching between multiple knowledge bases. Human–machine cooperation
can also be implemented to support two-way switching between robots and human agents.

•

Convenient back-office management: The system will
systematically carry out smart knowledge management, regularly perform quick model training and robot
education for AI robot customer service, and support
personalized configuration to satisfy the needs of
different customers.

•

Efficient operation outcome: Compared with human
agents, advanced customer service solutions do not
require training and can be launched quickly at an
affordable cost. Moreover, the robot solutions can
provide services around the clock and handle many
customers at the same time. In terms of compliance,
the text robot system is 100% controllable, stable,
and standardized, requires no emotional care, and
will not get tired of answering questions. At the same
time, it can record full logs and various report data for
business analysis.

Application scenario
The Xiaoyi text robot can answer such questions as service
inquiries on how to proceed to complete the process, outlet
information, product function introduction, and fees. For
business processing, it supports credit card application,
FX transaction, loan prepayment, and card replacement,
among others. As for sales recommendation, it can offer
product and fund recommendations for wealth management, as well as assist in loan processing, preliminary
screening for loans, and other services.
The Xiaoyi text robot has been deployed in many banks,
where it mainly handles three types of service: business
inquiry, business process, and sales recommendations.
To date, it has delivered excellent results. For example,
the Ping An Bank app has an average monthly traffic of
13.2 million (customer inquiries), with a question recognition rate of up to 99.47%. The Lufax app has an average
monthly traffic of 500,000, with a question recognition rate
of up to 97.95%.

Risks and Challenges of
Financial AI Intelligent
Customer Service Application
In this section, I will discuss the risks and challenges
involved in applying intelligent customer service in the
financial industry.

Risks
AI intelligent customer service in the financial industry will
facilitate the offering of products and services and save
manpower costs. But owing to the constraints imposed
CFA Institute Research Foundation

117

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

by the current development state of related technologies,
there are many potential risks in the intelligent customer
service business.

Business risk from misinterpretation
of intent
Intelligent customer service needs to be able to identify
and answer the questions raised by customers. However,
because the technology for NLU is still in its infancy, the AI
solution may not fully understand the questions asked by
customers the way the human agents do. Once the intention is misinterpreted, the system may not find a match in
the knowledge base or may match a wrong answer. There
is the risk of not being able to answer or providing the
wrong answer and operating instructions, which may lead
to customer dissatisfaction or even losses suffered by the
customers, creating reputation risk for banks. As such, the
usual solution is to deal only with questions recorded in the
intelligent customer service database and hand over questions that cannot be identified or that are beyond the scope
of the database to human agents. This solution reduces
manpower wastage and improves the user experience.

Owing to the unique nature of banking products, improper
understanding may cause the client to lose assets and
lead to unnecessary disputes between the client and the
bank. As such, the intelligent outbound customer service
also faces database limitations. If the user’s question is not
found in the AI database or cannot be identified by AI, the
question will be automatically transferred to a human agent.

Risks from outsourcing of intelligent
customer service products
AI technology is considered a cutting-edge technology
that is developing rapidly, and the banking industry has not
fully mastered its core content. Therefore, most customer
service robot projects have to be outsourced to third-party
institutions, which increases the dependency on third parties and uncontrollability for the banking industry. The bank
relies on the source code of the outsourcing vendor for the
transformation or project improvement, which weakens the
bank’s controllability. Meanwhile, because a large volume
of data has to be provided to the third-party institutions for
model training and user privacy is often embedded in such
data, any disclosure may cause substantial risks.

Risk of declining customer satisfaction

Challenges

Compared with AI intelligent customer service, human customer service can more accurately understand customer
intentions, grasp customer emotions, and communicate with
customers more patiently and humanely. Based on the current
statistics on human customer service, the service satisfaction
level for the majority of human customer service is above 90%.
Constrained by inadequacies in current intelligence technology, in practice, the intelligent customer service solution
is unable to provide services like an actual person can and
cannot grasp the feelings of customers in time. When customers are forced to use intelligent customer service to relieve
manpower pressure, it is likely to worsen the customer experience, increase the risk of declining customer satisfaction, and
even lower customer stickiness, leading to losses for financial
institutions. As such, financial institutions are taking a deep
dive into applications involving deep learning networks so that
intelligent customer service solutions can learn to handle customers’ emotions to give users a more humanized experience.
At the same time, financial institutions continue to hand over
customers with emotional issues that cannot be handled by
AI to human agents to ensure a more satisfactory user experience and to reduce manpower cost.

AI intelligent customer service is a comprehensive product
solution that integrates industry knowledge, databases,
speech recognition, NLP, and other technologies. Since
there is still much room for improvement in intelligent
technologies, such as NLP, and the sensitivity of financial
industry data makes the industry knowledge graph less
complete, there are challenges in deploying AI intelligent
customer service in the financial industry.

Business risks associated with outbound
customer service

Stringent financial data security
requirements and incomplete
knowledge graph

Although outbound customer service will improve operational efficiency and reduce costs, because the technology
is immature, outbound customer service currently supports
only simple interactions with customers in most cases,
which may lead to misunderstandings by customers.
118

CFA Institute Research Foundation

AI technology is inadequate
A breakthrough is needed for better capability in interpreting
intentions. AI customer service has low answer accuracy
and poor customer satisfaction levels, supports only a single
round of Q&A, and is not sufficiently responsive to questions
raised in a continuous dialogue. It has simple functions, supports only dialogue inquiry, and is unable to handle business
processes. In short, intelligent customer service answers
lack a “human touch.” As such, financial institutions should
focus on the application of cutting-edge AI technology and
ensure the rapid iterations of AI technology to satisfy the
more demanding service requirements of users.

The high costs of deployment and knowledge base maintenance lead to a relatively low cost performance presently.
However, with further iterations and development of AI

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

algorithms and the wider adoption of AI applications, the
cost of intelligent customer service will gradually decrease,
which will bring about better results.

Improving industry standards
With the gradual adoption of intelligent customer service,
some problems have begun to surface. Intelligent customer
service’s ability to operate around the clock has created
various social problems, such as harassment and privacy
infringement, which are not conducive to the healthy
development of the industry. As such, AI customer service
leaders should jointly develop a single standard to ensure
that all AI customer service products can fulfill the minimum industry requirements.

Development, Innovation,
and Prospects of the
Financial AI Intelligent
Customer Service Industry
In this section, I elaborate on various aspects of the future
of intelligent customer service in the financial industry and
discuss its development, innovation, and prospects.

Development and Innovation
Financial AI intelligent customer service systems will continue to innovate in three aspects: technology, interaction,
and business.

Technological innovation
The financial knowledge graph is in the building stage, and
the potential linkages between knowledge units can be
uncovered using such algorithms as knowledge reasoning, which can then be used to form a basis for potential
customers’ acquisition, new financial services development, and financial services promotion. AI technology is
expected to continue to iterate rapidly, creating smarter
and more capable knowledge applications and response
mechanisms.

Interactive innovation
With the rapid development of rich media, the modes of
information dissemination have become more diversified. Most of the knowledge in the financial industry is
described in words or numbers; the format is simple, but
with poor interpretability. By leveraging the intelligent customer service system in the rich media era, customer service products can enable various ways in which answers
are presented, such as animations and short videos, to
demonstrate the correct answers to users more clearly

and intuitively. It can build on the advantages of knowledge
graph to enhance the fluency and compatibility of dialogue,
improve the system’s ability to identify customers’ feelings
and real intentions, and quickly gear up the capability to
support multiple rounds of Q&A. Innovations in interaction
will further elevate users’ perception of the company and
increase user stickiness.

Business innovation
With intelligent customer service, financial institutions
can change the current practice of independently selling a
single product. In the future, with further breakthroughs in
such technologies as AI and big data, intelligent customer
service will be able to grasp customer intentions more
accurately and provide customers with more personalized
business assistance and product portfolios, shifting the
business model from a product-oriented approach to a
user-oriented approach. In addition, AI customer service will
be deployed in various businesses of the financial industry.
It will adapt to the changing business characteristics and
be able to deal with the pain points in the user’s current
business for efficient revenue generation.

Development Trends
There are three trends in the application of AI technology
in banking customer service centers and remote banking:
popularization, personalization, and diversification.

Popularization
As AI applications mature, their popularity will gradually
spread to the whole industry and all fields. With escalating manpower costs, the staffing cost of call centers and
remote banks will also increase over the years. Cost reduction and efficiency improvements have always been major
goals of each call center and remote bank. By making use
of applications based on AI, such as text robots, intelligent
voice navigation, and intelligent quality inspection, customer service centers and remote banks can gain a major
arsenal that they can adopt to reduce costs and boost
efficiency.

Personalization
As users continue to fine-tune their needs, the increasingly
demanding user requirements in terms of experience are
driving the transformation of customer service centers and
remote banking solutions toward greater personalization.
With intelligent voiceprint recognition, online service/sales,
human–machine collaboration, and other applications, we
can gradually upgrade from the traditional human agent
model to an intelligent customer service model for comprehensive, efficient, and intelligent operations and services,
which will be key to user satisfaction.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

119

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Diversification
Relying on strong technical support and market demand,
the interaction between traditional customer service centers and customers will transform from straight-line transactions to multichannel and multidimensional dialogue and
exchanges. Various ways of communicating appear, including videos, gestures, and even virtual reality, in addition to
traditional text and voice. Such communication methods
are more natural and may be a real breakthrough beyond
the existing service model, such as phone calls to provide
customers with faster three-dimensional services using
interactions from all media, bringing about a more diversified experience and creating more distinctively emotive
services.

Future Prospects
In the era of AI and big data, an increasing number of financial institutions have begun to develop financial technology. As operating costs continue to increase, it becomes
even more pressing to reduce manpower costs. Yet at
the same time, the demand for personalized services for
customers is gradually expanding. All these issues prompt
financial institutions to have additional requirements for
intelligent customer service. Looking ahead, AI intelligent
customer service will become even more common in the
financial industry. Upgrading of talents and technologies,
continuous enrichment of industry applications, and continuous improvement of industry specifications will promote the healthy development of the intelligent customer
service industry.

Strengthen talent pool and technology R&D
The intelligent customer service system relies on emerging and cutting-edge AI technologies, such as speech
recognition and NLP. To better optimize and develop the
technologies, businesses need to continuously strengthen
the talent pool, adopt best practices at home and abroad,
and groom talents with financial backgrounds and information technology expertise. This is the only way to achieve
a higher level of intelligence, improve the accuracy of
answers to customer inquiries, improve user experience,
and increase satisfaction. Going forward, with support from
neural networks and big data, such technologies as knowledge computing, multimodal fusion, and privacy computing are expected to form the basis for intelligent analysis
and decision making at financial institutions and to make
autonomous learning of financial market conditions a reality. Such systems will also be capable in trend projections
and can even provide customers with intelligent suggestions for their decision making. An efficient and accurate
trading system will provide the technological power to drive
innovation and development in the financial industry.

120

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Expand the applications of the intelligent
customer service system
There is a need to focus on current technology R&D and
promote comprehensive and all-around coverage of application scenarios by optimizing the basic functions for a
large-scale intelligent customer service platform geared
mainly to mobile terminals. In addition, the interactive mode
can gradually evolve from traditional voice and text to
video, augmented reality and holographic projection, and
other formats by combining emerging media with traditional media.
Meanwhile, AI customer service should be deeply
entrenched at several levels. In marketing, AI customer
service is included to generate intelligent marketing scenario applications and personalized services for individual
customers that can greatly improve the sales success rate
for wealth management products and promote the development of inclusive financial services. In customer service,
AI customer service will tap into more multiscenario applications, such as identity recognition, intelligent customer
service, and intelligent claims settlement, to serve more
customers during peak hours and fulfill demand in an effective and accurate manner that can improve customer satisfaction significantly.

Develop and refine relevant industry
specifications
For this emerging industry system, regulatory authorities
need to keep up with trends, draft corresponding regulatory plans and regulatory processes, avoid and prevent
series of risks that emerging intelligent customer service
systems may bring, promote the intelligent customer
service systems, and optimize the development of smart
finance. Building an intelligent customer service ecosystem
with multiple parties will make it an important focal point in
banking and financial services.

Conclusion
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic and the digital transformation wave, financial institutions need to reshape
their business models and adapt their working methods
to meet ever-changing customer and market demands
quickly and nimbly. Looking ahead, financial institutions
must take advantage of the cultural and behavioral
changes brought about by the pandemic to accelerate
their digital transformation process, even as they remain
cautious to avoid overreliance on existing models once
the pandemic is over. This move is critical for financial institutions to weather the storm and thrive in the
emerging new normal.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Riding on the COVID-19 pandemic as a catalyst for digital
transformation, financial institutions can also take this
opportunity to reflect on their role in emerging ecosystems
and how they can create value.

ensure the safety of customers’ assets, optimize financial
investment experience, and reduce investment risks in this
rapid transition to a modern digital financial system that is
highly adaptable, competitive, and inclusive.

The intelligent customer service system enables the online
transfer of human customer service workload by integrating current AI technology, NLU, and other emerging technologies. At the same time, with point-to-point communication
with customers, it can improve customer experience and
efficiency significantly. However, it is also necessary to fully
understand the imperfections and dual characteristics of
technology and to not blindly follow the trends in online
services and intelligence. In certain banking scenarios,
for example, intelligent customer service is still not able
to replace human agents. It is important to recognize the
possible risks of the intelligent customer service system
to avoid the risks and plan rationally. However, there is an
opportunity to leverage the power of technology to create
a new model for the development of the banking industry
that is more efficient, accurate, and convenient.

References

Within the supervision framework of the authorities,
in-depth application of intelligent customer service can
be used to develop innovative financial products, change
business methods, and optimize business processes to

Breuer, Ralph, Harald Fanderl, Markus Hedwig, and
Marcel Meuer. 2020. “Service Industries Can Fuel
Growth by Making Digital Customer Experiences a
Priority.” McKinsey Digital (30 April). www.mckinsey.com/
capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/serviceindustries-can-fuel-growth-by-making-digital-customerexperiences-a-priority.
Deloitte. 2020. “Realizing the Digital Promise: COVID-19
Catalyzes and Accelerates Transformation in Financial
Services.” www.deloitte.com/content/dam/assetsshared/legacy/docs/gx-fsi-realizing-the-digital-promisecovid-19-catalyzes-and-accelerates-transformation.pdf.
Liping, Xu. 2018. “AI-Driven Intelligent Customer Service.”
Shanghai Informatization.
Yuan, Xucong. 2021. “2021 China Intelligent Customer
Service Industry Insight.” LeadLeo Research Institute.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

121

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

10. ACCELERATED AI AND USE CASES
IN INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT
Jochen Papenbrock, Doctorate
Head of Financial Technology EMEA, NVIDIA

Introduction

•

A growing number of investment professionals are building
up capabilities and resources to exploit artificial intelligence (AI) and big data in their investment processes
systematically, using the most advanced technologies and
infrastructures, like “factories” for AI and simulation. This
trend results from the realization by many that AI and big
data will give them access to diversified sources of alpha,
more effective risk management, better client access, and
customization opportunities. Embracing such technologies
has become a clear differentiator.

Massive amounts of primary information such as textbased data (some of which are web-scraped) or alternative
data from satellite imagery need to be collected, cleaned,
streamed, and analyzed, activities that can be supported
by machines very efficiently. On top of that are additional
compute layers that help to trace back the processing
steps and reasoning of the machines, which is important
for human–machine interaction, such as providing validation, developing data narratives, and amplifying the subject
matter experts. It would hardly be possible to reach those
levels of reproducible and transparent information processing by manual analysis of those amounts of data.

In this chapter, I will take you behind the scenes, provide
insight into the art of the possible, and discuss how to best
make use of the most recent technologies, such as accelerated computing platforms in an implementation roadmap.
I will also provide useful tools and describe their implementation in several real-world use cases, such as diversified portfolio construction and environmental, social, and governance
(ESG) investing, using such techniques as natural language
processing (NLP), Explainable AI (XAI), and Geospatial AI.
Learning how to implement AI technologies is highly
relevant to investment companies that are aiming for
an elevated level of ESG integration. These companies
need to organize ESG scoring information, and they can
have a motivation to generate their own (“shadow”) ESG
scores and to constantly monitor and audit ESG disclosure
information—for example, to identify greenwashing and
to close monitoring gaps. The scores are produced for
ESG-integrating investment portfolios, such as by using
cross-sectional systematic trading strategies to rank
assets before portfolio construction. There is a constant
tracking of trading portfolios, including AI-based detection
of irregular transactions and behavior.
We are moving toward an evidence-based, data-driven,
AI-powered ESG approach. If implemented correctly with
the right data, data science approach, and IT/compute
infrastructure, the improved analysis would be:
•

neutral (in terms of no human bias), consistent, and
less biased (in terms of unwanted bias);

•

global, frequent, and available in a timely way;

•

enabled in a bottom-up way; and

122

CFA Institute Research Foundation

comprehensive due to the coverage of undisclosed
information.

Another example for innovative technologies that support
the investment and risk management process is AI-fueled
analytical capabilities, such as generating potential market
scenarios that have never been observed before but can
be viewed as realistic. In a second step, a machine learning
(ML) program identifies links between properties of those
market scenarios and the performance of a set of competing investment strategies. In the last step, a computationally intensive algorithm reveals the structures that the
AI/ML system has learned in the training process. This step
is particularly important because investment managers now
have the option to understand the decision-making process of the AI/ML system using XAI to validate it and build
a narrative for the choice of a certain investment strategy.
This can be applied in many investment processes that
seek to find the best way to diversify a given number of
assets and aggregate them into a robust portfolio. In practice, this approach is applicable in a variety of investment
companies, ranging from hedge funds to pension funds.
The amount of computation involved is probably not feasible
for a human being to execute manually in a lifetime.

Underrated Aspects of
AI-Driven Investment
Strategies
Successful investment firms of the future will be those that
strategically plan to incorporate AI and big data techniques
into their investment processes (Cao 2019). Besides the

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

importance of advancements in mathematical modeling,
several additional aspects of the AI strategy need to be
addressed:
1.

An appropriate infrastructure for AI training and inferencing, as well as for simulation for risk management,
algorithmic trading, and back testing

2.

A scalable enterprise-level workflow and process for
developing and deploying AI models

3.

Robust AI models that can be validated and explained,
which removes barriers to AI adoption and builds confidence in these innovative technologies

All this is part of the skill set that investment companies
can develop to make a difference and to use as a unique
selling proposition.
A key technology to implement these three aspects is
accelerated computing, which can be used for simulation,
data manipulation, AI model building, and deployment/
inferencing. Accelerated computing is widely available
today, and it can increase developer team productivity, ROI
(return on investment), model quality, and enterprise-level
scalability while decreasing TOC (total cost of ownership),
time to insight, energy consumption, and infrastructure
complexity. It is all about building and using more effective
models at higher speed and lower cost while keeping the
models robust and explainable.
Data science and AI teams will be able to amplify their productivity using “AI and simulation factories.” Using these
is also a crucial factor in attracting talent that can do the
“work of a lifetime” on such computing and accelerated
data infrastructures.
The need for accelerated computing becomes noticeably
clear when several data sources need to be acquired and
combined. Several data sources are jointly aggregated, correlated, analyzed, and visualized in increasingly rapid ways.
Technologies for accelerated data logistics and curation
enable the gathering of datasets from dozens of sources—
such as remote sensors, IoT (internet of things), social media,
and satellite data. Iteration speed is increased by reducing
analytical latency by seconds or even milliseconds. New
forecasting techniques based on ML that use alternative,
complex, unstructured datasets (such as satellite images)
and new generative methods to create synthetic data are
changing the way we produce and backtest strategies.
Investors around the world want to know more about the
performance of individual companies before others do.
They address leading indicators related to the impact of
future financial results, sustainability, and environmental
risk factors. Analysts need to effectively query and visually examine these vast datasets. Analytics software and

4

AI/ML running on traditional CPU-based servers can be less
capable of processing huge amounts of data required for
advanced, multilayered, and multimodal analysis in a timely
manner and might use more energy than graphics processing units (GPUs) do.

The Accelerated Computing
Revolution and How It
Enhances Investment
Management
GPUs can be found in many compute clusters, ranging from
supercomputing to public clouds and even enterprise data
centers. They can accelerate the processing of huge amounts
of structured and unstructured large datasets and execute
large training and inferencing workloads. These ultra-fast
processors are designed for massively accelerated training
epochs, queries, complex image rendering, and interactive visualization. Combined with purpose-built analytics
software, they deliver the kind of speed and zero-latency
interactivity that professional investors need.
Investment companies of all shapes and sizes are taking
advantage of this revolution in GPU analytics. GPUaccelerated platforms enable faster analytics to uncover
more sophisticated investment and growth opportunities.
GPU-powered models offer higher throughput with lower
latency. As a result, more sophisticated models can be
used for a given latency budget, leading to far more accurate results.
As the world generates increasingly new forms of data that
provide meaningful signals for conclusions to be drawn
about future business and market performance, accelerated computing platforms can become an increasingly
valuable technology.
GPU-based acceleration technologies are universally applicable and help not only with data collection, preparation,
and model building but also in the production phase, including model deployment, inferencing, and data visualization.
MLPerf4 is a consortium of AI leaders from academia,
research labs, and industry whose mission is to “build fair
and useful benchmarks” that provide independent evaluations of training and inference performance for hardware,
software, and services—all conducted under prescribed
conditions. GPU-based systems shine in these benchmarks
regularly, as can be seen in the MLPerf tables.
Equally important is the model validation step, where the
model and data are made transparent and explainable
to reconnect them to human intelligence, creativity, and

For more information, go to the ML Commons webpage at https://mlcommons.org/en/#philosophy.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

123

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

domain expertise—a step often forgotten or underrated. The
explainability step can also be computationally demanding,
which is the reason accelerated computing is a valuable
resource, as it realizes significant speedups (Mitchell,
Frank, and Holmes 2022).

and with greater flexibility. Such approaches as “fail
fast, fail forward” can be implemented with accelerated computing, which can be viewed as a kind of “time
machine” by speeding up the iterations required for model
development.

To summarize, accelerated computing can build more
model alternatives, with potentially higher accuracy and
at the same time at lower cost and energy consumption

Exhibit 1 shows some areas where GPU-accelerated computing supports investment (risk) managers, traders, and
(AI/ML) quants.

Exhibit 1. Overview of GPU-Accelerated Domains plus Corresponding Tools
and Software Packages for Implementation
Domains Enhanced by
GPU-accelerated Computing
Loading and preprocessing
enormous amounts of data
in dataframe operations

Descriptions of Useful Tools and Software Packages for Implementation
• Open GPU Data Science with RAPIDSa suite of software libraries to execute end-to-end
data science and analytics pipelines
• Exposes GPU parallelism and high-bandwidth memory speed through Python
interfaces
• RAPIDS accelerator for Apache Spark supports the following steps: data acquisition,
preprocessing, manipulation, data curation
• RAPIDS library cuDF is related to Python library pandas

AI/ML/NLP and financial data
science

• GPU-accelerated versions of PyTorch, TensorFlow, and other widely used deep
learning frameworks
• TAO: transfer learning based on optimized architectures and pretrained models
• RAPIDS (as described before): end-to-end data science and analytics pipelines
• RAPIDS cuML: GPU-accelerated versions of XGBoost and scikit-learn (like
unsupervised learning, clustering decomposition, and dimensionality reduction);
GPU-accelerated training for forest models, such as XGBoost, LightGBM, scikit-learn
random forest
• GPU-accelerated network analysis with RAPIDS cuGraph (linked to NetworkX) for
community detection, link analysis/prediction, traversal, centrality, tree filtering,
network visualization, Graph Neural Networks with Deep Graph Library (DGL), and
PyTorch Geometric (PyG)
• Daskb integrates with RAPIDS and can distribute data and computation over multiple
GPUs, either in the same system or in a multinode cluster
• MLOps (machine learning operations) tools, such as high-performance deep learning
inference (such as a deep learning inference optimizer and runtime that deliver low
latency and high throughput for inference applications) and inference server software
(helps standardize model deployment and execution and delivers fast and scalable AI
in production)c
• Learning to rank (e.g., for constructing cross-sectional systematic strategies)
• End-to-end frameworks for training and inferencing large language models (LLMs)
with up to trillions of parametersd
• Cloud-native suites of AI and data analytics software optimized for the development
and deployment of AI, like an enterprise AI operating system for the accelerated AI
platforme
(continued)

124

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 1. Overview of GPU-Accelerated Domains plus Corresponding Tools
and Software Packages for Implementation (continued)
Domains Enhanced by
GPU-accelerated Computing
Model risk management and
human–machine interaction

Descriptions of Useful Tools and Software Packages for Implementation
• AI model validation and managing AI risk in the enterprise for AI models in production
• Transparent, explainable, robust, auditable models for building trust techniques
to test and improve robustness, explainability, fairness, and safety of the models,
including large-scale visualization of data and model results with a usually
considerable amount of compute
• AI-generated synthetic data further enhance the model building process: Synthetic
data improve model stability and explainability but can also generate stress-test
scenarios that have never been observed but are realistic at the same time

High-performance computing
(HPC) for derivative pricing, risk
management, and portfolio
allocation

• GPU-accelerated software development kits (SDKs) for Monte Carlo risk simulations
for market risk applications (exotic derivative pricing, variable annuities, modeling
underlying volatilities—e.g., Heston), counterparty risk (CVA, XVA, FVA, MVA valuation
adjustments) and market generators/simulators
• Relevant benchmark is STAC-A2f for risk models across throughput, performance,
and scalabilityg
• Advanced compilers, libraries, and software tools are available for real-world
financial HPC applications, including American and exotic option pricing with multiple
methods of writing GPU-accelerated algorithms, including the use of accelerated ISO
(International Organization for Standardization) Standard C++
• Risk calculations with GPUs can be done 40 times faster, reducing costs by 80%.
A Federal Reserve analysis showed speedups of over 250 times for GPUs vs. CPUs
(central processing units) in running Monte Carlo simulations for European and
American options pricingh

Algo trading, risk management,
and backtesting

• Algorithm trading requires AI/ML workloads, filters, backtesting engines,
bootstrapping scenarios, and optimization algorithms. Algorithm trading is a
top use case with high growth rates and penetration. It makes use of HPC and
GPU-accelerated deep learning for training and inference
• GPU acceleration delivered more than 6,000 times speedup on the STAC-A3
benchmark algorithm for hedge fundsi

Quantum computing with use
cases in portfolio optimization,
MC simulation, and ML

• GPU-powered speedup of quantum circuit simulations based on state vector and
tensor network methods by orders of magnitudej
• Hybrid quantum-classical computing involving QPU, GPU, CPUk

www.nvidia.com/en-us/deep-learning-ai/software/rapids/.

a

www.dask.org/.

b

https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT and https://github.com/triton-inference-server/server.

c

https://github.com/NVIDIA/NeMo.

d

www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/products/ai-enterprise/.

e

www.stacresearch.com/a2.

f

Some of the largest firms on Wall Street and the broader global financial industry rely on STAC-A2 as a key risk model benchmark to measure
compute platform performance. “The STAC-A2 Benchmark suite is the industry standard for testing technology stacks used for compute-intensive
analytic workloads involved in pricing and risk management” (www.stacresearch.com/a2). For example, it measures the time to complete the
calculation of a set of Greek values for an option (which measure the sensitivity of the price of an option to changes, such as price of the underlying asset, volatility, or interest rates). Thus, Greeks—which should be recalculated as an option’s price varies—provide a risk management tool
for assessing market impacts on a portfolio of options.
g

Scott (2018).

h

Ashley (2019).

i

https://github.com/NVIDIA/cuQuantum.

j

https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-quantum.

k

CFA Institute Research Foundation

125

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Further information can be found in Business Systems
International’s executive guide for the use of GPUs in data
science and quantitative research in financial trading.5

Three Examples of
Accelerated Computing
in Real-World Investment
Use Cases
This section demonstrates the GPU-accelerated tools and
software package from the previous section in action.
I describe three cases—two on ESG investing and one
on diversified portfolio construction.

ESG and Risk Analysis Using NLP
and Document Intelligence
NLP is one of the most prominent AI techniques that processes text information for many tasks. Among them are
named entity recognition, topic modeling, intent identification, relation extraction, sentiment analysis, language
translation, question answering, and text summarization.
Financial news and ESG disclosure reports exhibit complex
formats along with images and tables, where document
intelligence and AI are used to extract and digitize the
relevant information (text, tables, pictures, etc.).
Sustainability reports need to comply with diverse taxonomies and reporting standards, which involves semantic
understanding of various financial and nonfinancial disclosures. A central ESG and risk data repository can be built up
to operationalize reporting and adapt to evolving regulatory
requirements.
A real-time ESG analytics process drives ESG insights and
scenario analysis with news and media screening. Adverse
event monitoring further enables investors to stay in
control of both reporting and assessment. Advanced NLP
technologies monitor unstructured data in news and social
media articles. The insights can be used in conjunction
with the ESG scores from the rating agencies to provide a
holistic view and thus improve decision making based on
techniques.
Investors and fund managers use these assistive technologies to detect and mitigate ESG fraud, such as

greenwashing. Fraud and anomaly detection platforms that
monitor firm disclosures and are powered by a comprehensive greenwashing detection framework will drive investor
confidence and flow of funds to truly green entities—one of
the biggest challenges for ESG investors today.
NLP-based detection of fraudulent disclosures, news, and
communications is the first line of defense against companies misrepresenting brown assets to solve their problem
of stranded assets and loss of valuation. Quantitative and
measurable data are needed to enable comparability. There
can be real-time assessments of issuer operations.
In all these NLP-driven use cases, it becomes clear that
large language models can be greatly beneficial from an
engineering perspective because these models can be
adapted to various tasks with a few shots with examples
and prompt engineering (Gopani 2022).
Over the past few years, some leading software and solution companies have been established, making use of
accelerated computing to be able to quickly process vast
amounts of data. Some of them have developed no-code
environments6 and numerous AI-based services and data
around NLP for ESG information.7

Earth Observation Data
and Spatial Finance
Earth observation (EO) is the gathering of information
about planet Earth’s physical, chemical, and biological
systems via remote sensing technologies, usually involving satellites carrying imaging devices, delivering reliable
and repeat-coverage datasets.8 EO is used to monitor and
assess the status of and changes in the environment.
EO and remote sensing combined with ML have the potential to transform the availability of information in our financial system (Papenbrock, Ashley, and Schwendner 2021).
“Spatial finance” is the integration of geospatial data and
analysis into financial services. It allows financial markets
to better measure and manage climate-related and environmental risks, such as loss of biodiversity, threats to water
quality, and deforestation. According to the EU Agency for
the Space Programme (EUSPA 2022, p. 12), the insurance
and finance segment will become the largest contributor
to global EO revenues in 2031 (with EUR994 million and an
18.2% market share).

5

https://media.bsi.uk.com/white-papers/Business_Systems_International_(BSI)_-_Nvidia_GPUs_in_Quantitative_Research_Executive_Guide.pdf.

6

See, for example, https://accern.com/esg-investing and https://demo.softserveinc.com/esg-platform.

See NVIDIA’s on-demand webinar “How No-Code NLP Drives Fast and Accurate ESG Insights”: https://info.nvidia.com/nlp-risk-managementesg-financial-services.html?ncid=so-link-135948-vt09&=&linkId=100000133473284&ondemandrgt=yes#cid=ix06_so-link_en-us.
7

See the EU Science Hub’s “Earth Observation” webpage: https://joint-research-centre.ec.europa.eu/scientific-activities-z/
earth-observation_en#:~:text=Earth%20observation%20is%20the%20gathering,the%20natural%20and%20manmade%20environment.
8

126

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

EO and remote sensing data can be extremely complex to
process. Processing massive amounts of EO data from multiple sources involves complex workflows and ETL (extract,
transform, load) processes that first load and transform the
data in several steps and then apply advanced AI models
for computer vision and environmental monitoring. Typical
steps are image formation, calibration and geospatial processing, data streaming, decompression, computer vision,
model inference, scientific visualization, and (photorealistic, cinematic, 3D) rendering.

Another use case is geospatial ESG.10 It uses geospatial
data to gain insight into a specific commercial asset, business, portfolio, or geographic area. It starts with pinpointing
the location and defining the ownership of a commercial
asset, such as a factory, mine, field, road, or retail property,
known as asset data. Using various spatial approaches, it
is then possible to assess the asset against observational
data to gain an understanding of the initial and ongoing
environmental impacts, as well as other relevant social and
governance factors.

Also, the more granular and high-resolution the data, the
more insight can be generated in finance and trading as
individual assets can be observed and tracked. Sometimes
the data need to be streamed or must be analyzed over
time (“spatiotemporal”). The value creation for financial
insights and trading sometimes also requires fusing multiple sensor sources to create a context. Imagery needs to
be corrected, and features/patterns need to be extracted.

Geospatial ESG leverages geospatial AI using satellite
imagery and sensor data to detect environmental or social
parameter violations of companies and supply chains,
such as biodiversity reduction, water source pollution, and
greenhouse gas emissions. These detection and analysis
models further enable investors to make more-informed
decisions about a company separate from its voluntary
disclosures or to monitor conformity with standards once
established. There are enhanced risk assessments of ESG
criteria on their investments, and access to real-time geospatial, environmental, and social data is a critical tool to
enhance their evaluations.

Accelerated computing can be a key technology in spatial
finance to process EO and remote sensing data in a fast,
reliable, cost-efficient, flexible, and energy-efficient way,
and the models need to be of high quality and high resolution to build financial services, products, and signals for
specific customers. Today it is possible to construct endto-end (streaming) pipelines based on GPU acceleration,
including processing of JPEG files, geolocation algorithms,
spatial and trajectory computations, streaming, and computer vision, including clustering and graph analytics
in RAPIDS.9
In the finance industry, the uptake of EO is becoming
increasingly important in informing decision-making processes often before markets are affected. There are several
concrete use cases in commodity trading where biodiversity and conservation across value chains can be analyzed.
Trading of such products as metals, agricultural products,
and energy (gas, oil, etc.) is being monitored and factored
into value chains to make energy price predictions.
Investment managers are interested in identifying supply–
demand balance changes. These are fed into trading
models, such as in the oil market. Disruption of supply in
hard and soft commodities by extreme weather, climate
change, natural or other disasters/accidents, and pollution
can be evaluated by processing EO data. Doing so usually
includes an analysis of the history and assessment of the
current physical situation. Regarding soft commodities
(agricultural products), the users are usually interested in
predictions on the yield rates of the next harvest as early
as possible in the growing cycle. Knowing about crop shortfall in one region helps diversify and hedge early on.

9

Geospatial ESG helps validate issuer disclosures in cases
where other data and information are unavailable, making
ESG assessments more reliable. EO data are creating the
foundation for predictability in ESG scoring/ESG performance. They help in an evolving regulatory landscape, and
they are real-time, quantifiable, and measurable data for
strengthening ESG analysis.
NLP and geospatial AI for sustainable finance are not only
concerns of investment companies, banks, and insurance
companies. Central banks around the world also are collaborating on greening the financial system and use accelerated data science, AI, and GeoAI (Papenbrock, Ashley, and
Schwendner 2021) for sustainable finance.
Asset devaluation and long-term risks in ESG investing
must be kept in mind. Climate risk is a critical ESG focus
today. Potential infrastructure and property losses due to
climate change affect organizations’ long-term financial
sustainability. Many investors examine a company’s preparation assessment and capacity to forecast and respond to
a variety of climate threats and environmental changes.
There are transition risks but also physical risks, such as
extreme weather and record temperatures, that are now
recognized as events that can be predicted and factored
into financial planning. Droughts, floods, and wildfires are
all examples of acute threats, but tropical illnesses due to
rising temperatures and loss of biodiversity also fall in this

Such as the cuSpatial library for GPU-accelerated spatial and trajectory data management and analytics: https://github.com/rapidsai/cuspatial.

For more information, see https://wwf-sight.org/geospatial-esg; EUSPA (2023); European Space Agency (2022); Spatial Finance Initiative (2021);
Patterson, Izquierdo, Tibaldeschi, Schmitt, Williams, Bessler, Wood, Spaeth, Fang, Shi, et al. (2022).
10

CFA Institute Research Foundation

127

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

category. Additional risks can occur because of political
instability and conflicts that climate change may generate,
including supply chains and critical infrastructure that can
be affected by extreme weather events.
Investors are exposed to such complex, evolving risks.
Data, AI, simulation, and visualization will help investors
better understand the risks and develop actions and
mitigation strategies.
The adoption of such use cases will be further increased
when the quality, availability, and granularity of observational climate and environmental data are enhanced. The
models for predicting extreme weather events and climate
change will further improve, especially becoming more
granular and of a higher resolution. This outcome can be
achieved by such technologies as physics-informed AI and
accelerated supercomputing. An example is FourCastNet
(Pathak, Subramanian, Harrington, Raja, Chattopadhyay,
Mardani, Kurth, Hall, Li, Azizzadenesheli, et al. 2022).
Frameworks exist for developing physics ML neural network
models.11 Visualization of simulated scenarios on a highly
granular asset level is a technique that helps analysts evaluate the risks and impacts. There are platforms for building large-scale digital twin simulations of environmental
processes and risks.12
An example workflow would involve the following
components:
•

(continuous, streaming) satellite imagery to model
inference pipelines, such as capabilities for land/sea
classification systems and GISs (geographic information systems);

•

compute-powered, physics-informed neural networks
and Fourier neural operators for simplification for fast
predictive capability of climatic events; and

•

3D rendering and visualization to understand what is
happening and see the what-if scenarios.

AI and Simulation for Diversified
Portfolio Construction
There are several problems with the way modern portfolio
theory (MPT) and portfolio diversification are often implemented in practice. One is backtest overfitting on the same
historical data, and another is using quadratic optimization
with noisy covariance estimates as inputs. In this section,
I will describe approaches to mitigate these problems. The
approaches are consistent with the Monte Carlo backtesting paradigm and could address the replication crisis to a
certain extent. Synthetic datasets should be the preferred

approach for developing tactical investment algorithms
(López de Prado 2019). This approach helps investors
deal with the unknown data-generating process. Using
synthetic data is not new, and it is like generating realistic
artificial landscapes and training industrial autonomous
machines, such as robots and self-driving cars. Synthetic
asset return data are a way to test AI-driven investment
strategies.
Approaches to diversified portfolio construction do not
always require quadratic optimization but can be solved
heuristically to reduce realized risk and heavy portfolio
turnover. AI can even help investors decide when to switch
the approach in an interpretable way.
A lot of research has been conducted and much progress
has been made on generating synthetic asset return data
with typical stylized facts of asset returns using various
AI-based techniques. Less focus has been placed on generating correlated returns with stylized empirical facts
of asset return covariance matrices. This is important for
pricing and risk management of correlation-dependent
financial instruments and portfolios. Approaches using
GANs (generative adversarial networks) generate realistic
correlation scenarios (Marti 2020). An approach called
“matrix evolutions” uses evolutionary multi-objective optimization, which can be implemented in parallel to benefit
from accelerators (Papenbrock, Schwendner, Jaeger, and
Krügel 2021). The idea is to address multiple stylized facts
of empirical correlation matrices at the same time and join
them in a multi-objective optimization problem. The user
defines ranges to generate “populations” of correlation
matrices that cover a variety and combination of stylized
facts, on the one hand, and exhibit properties of correct
correlation matrices, on the other hand. In this way, millions
of realistic correlation matrices can be generated that have
never been observed before. Approaches to robust investment portfolios can be tested against those populations
of correlation matrix scenarios to test and analyze their
behavior and robustness.
Based on these or other artificially generated asset return
data, it is possible to formulate a program for ML that predicts the outperformance of a certain portfolio construction approach based on information about certain market
regimes. In this way, an investment client could produce a
desired portfolio of assets or asset classes, and the investment manager could respond with a recommendation for
which portfolio construction method should be preferred
for a certain market phase or regime to realize a very robust
diversified portfolio.
The approach works as follows: Each generated market
scenario is represented in terms of its stylized empirical

For example, see the “NVIDIA Modulus” webpage: https://developer.nvidia.com/modulus.

11

For example, see the “NVIDIA Omniverse” webpage: www.nvidia.com/en-us/omniverse/.

12

128

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

facts—across the portfolio assets and including their correlation properties. These are the input features to the ML
program. The labels can be measured by the outperformance of a certain portfolio construction method in that
specific market scenario. By generating millions of those
scenarios, one gets millions of labeled learning datasets,
which are the training material for the ML program. This
can be done for several available portfolio construction
methods, and in the end, the ML program can be used to
recommend a more robust portfolio construction approach
in a specific market phase. In addition, the machine can
even produce explanations in terms such as reporting the
driving properties of certain market phases leading to an
outperformance of a certain portfolio construction method.
This outcome is achieved with post hoc explainers such as
SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations), which are computationally intensive and can be GPU-accelerated, and with the
massively parallel exact calculation of SHAP scores for tree
ensembles (Mitchell et al. 2022).13

in a very flexible and convenient way of matrix evolutions or
producing completely new ways of constructing portfolios,
as in an article by Schwendner, Papenbrock, Jaeger, and
Krügel (2021). The approach and workflow can even be
used to tame crypto portfolios (Papenbrock, Schwendner,
and Sandner 2021).

The entire workflow is described in an article by Jaeger,
Krügel, Marinelli, Papenbrock, and Schwendner (2021). The
idea is to produce alternative portfolio construction mechanisms, such as hierarchical risk parity (HRP), that use graph
theory and representation learning to construct the portfolio by cutting through the estimation noise. In many market
environments and many investment universes, these
approaches offer lower realized risk than can be achieved
by explicit portfolio risk minimization algorithms. This
sounds unreal but is achieved by the two-step approach of
HRP: (1) matrix seriation and (2) recursive bisection. In this
way, the natural taxonomy of assets is preserved, and the
less robust matrix inversion step can be skipped.

Acceleration technologies support the entire workflow and
data science process—from loading large files and curating
dataframe operations to conducting model building and
inferencing. They can even perform the model validation
and explanation steps. This support enables a more interactive and data-centric approach to AI.

As this procedure does not work in all market environments, an AI-driven program can identify in which
constellations the new method can be used. It can also
deliver some explanations using Shapley values, a method
based on cooperative game theory. This explainability
helps portfolio managers identify the correct approach to
portfolio construction depending on investment universe
and market state (Papenbrock and Schwendner 2015).
Interactive dashboards allow the validation and audit
of the AI models and the extraction of evidence-based,
data-driven insights and narratives.
The implementation of such an approach requires several
computing-intensive steps to generate market data, to
train AI models, and to finally extract information about the
inner decision making of the models to draw conclusions.
A normal desktop PC would be able to produce reliable outcomes after several hours, whereas a small GPU cluster can
produce results after a few minutes (Papenbrock 2021).
The entire workflow can be extended by many steps—
namely, generating synthetic multidimensional market data

Conclusion and Next Steps
In this chapter, I discussed some of the latest investment technologies and provided useful tools to leverage
recent developments in AI infrastructure and software
development.
I demonstrated how these technologies give access to
new and more stable sources of alpha, advanced risk
management technologies, higher levels of customization, and better meet the requirements of investment
clients.

The use cases on ESG investing and robust portfolio construction have demonstrated how accelerated computing
platforms help leverage both alternative, unstructured data
(NLP, computer vision, document intelligence) and classical
time-series data, such as asset returns.
Factories for complex data processing, AI, simulation, and
visualization help the industry build resilient, sustainable,
and profitable investment products/services in a customized, transparent, and explainable way.

References
Alarcon, N. 2020. “Accelerating Automated and Explainable
Machine Learning with RAPIDS and NVIDIA GPUs.” Technical
Blog, NVIDIA DEVELOPER (17 November). https://developer.
nvidia.com/blog/accelerating-automated-and-explainablemachine-learning-with-rapids/.
Ashley, J. 2019. “NVIDIA Delivers More than 6,000×
Speedup on Key Algorithm for Hedge Funds.” NVIDIA
(13 May). https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/2019/05/13/
accelerated-backtesting-hedge-funds/?ncid=so-twinrcmflssx6-84884.
Cao, Larry. 2019. “AI Pioneers in Investment Management.”
CFA Institute. www.cfainstitute.org/-/media/documents/
survey/AI-Pioneers-in-Investment-Management.pdf.

For a related blog on explainable ML with acceleration, see Alarcon (2020).

13

CFA Institute Research Foundation

129

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

European Space Agency. 2022. “Space for Green
Finance: Use Cases and Commercial Opportunities”
(November). https://commercialisation.esa.int/2023/01/
market-trend-space-for-green-finance/.
EUSPA. 2022. “EO and GNSS Market Report.” www.euspa.
europa.eu/sites/default/files/uploads/euspa_market_
report_2022.pdf.
EUSPA. 2023. “EU Space for Green Transformation”
(25 January). www.euspa.europa.eu/newsroom/news/
eu-space-helps-drive-green-transformation.
Gopani, A. 2022. “How NVIDIA Trains Large Language
Models.” AIM (23 March). https://analyticsindiamag.com/
how-nvidia-trains-large-language-models/.
Jaeger, Markus, Stephan Krügel, Dimitri Marinelli, Jochen
Papenbrock, and Peter Schwendner. 2021. “Interpretable
Machine Learning for Diversified Portfolio Construction.”
Journal of Financial Data Science 3 (3): 31–51.
López de Prado, Marcos. 2019. “Tactical Investment
Algorithms” (26 September). Available at https://ssrn.com/
abstract=3459866.
Marti, G. 2020. “CORRGAN: Sampling Realistic Financial
Correlation Matrices Using Generative Adversarial
Networks.” ICASSP 2020–2020 IEEE International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
(ICASSP): 8459–63.
Mitchell, R., E. Frank, and G. Holmes. 2022. “GPUTreeShap:
Massively Parallel Exact Calculation of SHAP Scores for Tree
Ensembles.” PeerJ Computer Science 8 (5 April): e880.
Papenbrock, Jochen. 2021. “Accelerating Interpretable
Machine Learning for Diversified Portfolio Construction.”
Technical Blog, NVIDIA DEVELOPER (29 September). https://
developer.nvidia.com/blog/accelerating-interpretablemachine-learning-for-diversified-portfolio-construction/.
Papenbrock, Jochen, and Peter Schwendner. 2015.
“Handling Risk-On/Risk-Off Dynamics with Correlation
Regimes and Correlation Networks.” Financial Markets
and Portfolio Management 29: 125–47.
Papenbrock, Jochen, John Ashley, and Peter Schwendner.
2021. “Accelerated Data Science, AI and GeoAI for
Sustainable Finance in Central Banking and Supervision.”
Paper presented at International Conference on Statistics
for Sustainable Finance, Paris (September). www.bis.org/
ifc/publ/ifcb56_23.pdf.

130

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Papenbrock, Jochen, Peter Schwendner, Markus Jaeger,
and Stephan Krügel. 2021. “Matrix Evolutions: Synthetic
Correlations and Explainable Machine Learning for
Constructing Robust Investment Portfolios.” Journal of
Financial Data Science 3 (2): 51–69.
Papenbrock, Jochen, Peter Schwendner, and Philipp
Sandner. 2021. “Can Adaptive Seriational Risk Parity Tame
Crypto Portfolios?” Working paper (15 July).
Pathak, Jaideep, Shashank Subramanian, Peter Harrington,
Sanjeev Raja, Ashesh Chattopadhyay, Morteza Mardani,
Thorsten Kurth, David Hall, Zongyi Li, Kamyar
Azizzadenesheli, et al. 2022. “FourCastNet: A Global DataDriven High-Resolution Weather Model Using Adaptive
Fourier Neural Operators.” Preprint, arXiv (24 February).
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2202.11214v1.pdf.
Patterson, David, Pablo Izquierdo, Paolo Tibaldeschi,
Susanne Schmitt, Alicia Williams, Janey Bessler, Steven
Wood, Mike Spaeth, Fei Fang, Ryan Shi, et al. 2022. “The
Biodiversity Data Puzzle: Exploring Geospatial Approaches
to Gain Improved ‘Biodiversity’ Insight for Financial Sector
Applications and the Pressing Need to Catalyze Efforts.”
WWF-UK (December). www.wwf.org.uk/sites/default/
files/2022-12/The-Biodiversity-Data-Puzzle.pdf.
Schwendner, Peter, Jochen Papenbrock, Markus Jaeger, and
Stephan Krügel. 2021. “Adaptive Seriational Risk Parity and
Other Extensions for Heuristic Portfolio Construction Using
Machine Learning and Graph Theory.” Journal of Financial
Data Science 3 (4): 65–83.
Scott, L. 2018. “Finance—Parallel Processing for Derivative
Pricing” (March). www.nvidia.com/en-us/on-demand/
session/gtcsiliconvalley2018-s8123/.
Spatial Finance Initiative. 2021. “State and Trends of Spatial
Finance 2021: Next Generation Climate and Environmental
Analytics for Resilient Finance.” www.cgfi.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/SpatialFinance_Report.pdf.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

11. SYMBOLIC AI: A CASE STUDY
Huib Vaessen
Head of Research and Analytics Real Assets, APG Asset Management
The degree to which machines can help in investment decision making varies widely, depending on the investment
strategy. The solution discussed in this case study is based
on symbolic artificial intelligence (AI) and serves investment teams using fundamental investment strategies.

Samuel: An Automated Real
Estate Portfolio Management
Solution Based on Symbolic AI
Samuel is a composite AI14 system that collaborates with
humans. It acts as a digital colleague that guides the
human investment team with transparent, systematized,
and well-substantiated advice. Its decisions are transparently substantiated and can be tracked down to each
datapoint used, allowing for efficient reconciliation with the
thought process of the human team.
A composite AI system uses the AI techniques most
suitable for the result. Although nonsymbolic AI, such as
machine learning (ML) and its subclass neural networks,
has gained much attention, many real life use cases warrant the use of symbolic AI techniques. Symbolic AI, or
classical AI, is a collection of techniques that are based
on human-readable and high-level representations of the
problem. Examples are rule-based engines and decision

trees. It was the dominant approach to AI research
since its early days through the mid-1990s (Russell and
Norvig 2020).
First, the use case of an automated portfolio management solution for a fundamental investor warrants typical
symbolic AI techniques because the amount of available
data on investments and markets has increased but is still
not sufficient to allow for ML techniques in many cases.
Second, given that the interaction between human and
machine is crucial—because humans have to be able to
understand the reasoning for high-stakes investment
decisions—the transparency and interpretability of the
technique is important. Third, typically there is already
important human knowledge available in a fundamental
investment team that one might want to leverage. Symbolic
techniques allow for codifying this human knowledge as
one can imagine with rule-based systems. Many systems
built with symbolic AI techniques are called “expert systems.” In this chapter, mainly systems built with symbolic
methods are described.
Technically, the automated solution can have many
forms, but in general, it constitutes the following parts as
depicted in Exhibit 1: a knowledge base, data pipelines,
knowledge pipelines, the calculation engine, and tools
such as dashboards that interact with the human portfolio
manager.

Exhibit 1. Example: APG Asset Management Real Estate (APG RE)
Interaction tools

Data pipelines

Knowledge pipelines
The knowledge base

Calculation engine

Source: APG Asset Management.

As defined in Gartner’s “Hype Cycle for Emerging Technologies, 2020,” composite AI refers to a “combination of different AI techniques to
achieve the best result.”
14

CFA Institute Research Foundation

131

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Next, I will discuss each component of Samuel in more
detail.
The knowledge base is a database that contains all data
related to the decision-making process and includes all
principles that need to be applied to those data in order
to get the outcomes. The knowledge base is fed by data
pipelines for the data and knowledge pipelines for the
principles. Humans are needed to provide oversight. The
knowledge base can be stored in all kinds of relational and
graph databases.
The calculation engine applies the rules to the data and
stores the outputs in the knowledge base. The calculation
engine requires human oversight and needs to be configured by humans. It contains a “worker” with CPU (central
processing unit) power that does the calculations and a
trigger mechanism that triggers the calculations when
needed.
Interaction tools enable the interaction between Samuel
and humans. The output of Samuel needs to be interpreted
by humans, and the input needs to be given by humans.
Interaction tools can have many different forms, ranging
from dashboards accessible via the web browser to search
bars and forms for input. If the interaction between the
humans and the digital colleague is not well organized,
the hurdles to provide input will be too high and the output
less valuable. Similarly, if the output cannot be found by
the right people at the right time, the impact of Samuel

is lost. To ensure appropriate interaction tools, constant
adoption is needed to embed Samuel in the other business
processes to minimize the hurdles to use the output and to
provide input by humans.
The data pipelines are ETL (extract, transform, load)15 flows
that ingest data from various sources outside the team.
Here the IDs are matched, and data are prepared for further usage. The formatting of the sources changes over
time, and data pipelines might have to be adjusted for that.
Additionally, new data pipelines need to be added over time
and integrated with the other data. Humans are needed to
build the pipelines and provide oversight. Data pipelines
can be written in Python, C++, or any other coding language
and triggered by an orchestration tool that decides when to
run the pipeline.
The knowledge pipelines are an active collaboration
between humans and Samuel. Knowledge is constantly
evolving, and as such, the principles need to be updated
regularly. Thus, it is important that whenever new knowledge is created after a group discussion, this knowledge is
made explicit and codified in the form of principles. Making
knowledge explicit is a time-consuming process because
often implicit knowledge is incomplete or inconsistent over
persons or situations. Before a team has a set of principles
that adequately describes the knowledge that is consistent
among persons and situations, many discussions must
have been held.

Samuel: APG Real Estate Investment Team’s
Digital Colleague
The APG real estate investment decision-making process is top down—first an allocation across regions, then
an allocation across peer groups (sectors) within regions, and lastly the selection of the opportunities within
each peer group.
The real estate team introduced Samuel in the winter of 2021.
In the initial phase, a team has to map its decision-making process, state which arguments are used, and
explain how these arguments are substantiated. This part of the process is a project that involves many discussions between the members of the investment team to agree on the relevance of each argument and how to
substantiate it. This project takes time but is a one-off. After that, refinements of the decision-making process
are an ongoing add-on so are less intense.

ETL is a typical term used to indicate a process that extracts data from one source, transforms it, and loads it into another source.

15

132

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Samuel collects all relevant input and updates the model when there are new data available. All this input is
available for the portfolio managers’ reference and forms the baseline for portfolio decisions. Whenever a human
proposal is made, Samuel can also challenge that decision.
For example, Samuel updates the rental growth variable in the discounted cash flow model based on preset
rules. Office rental growth is based on the quality of the building, which, in turn, is determined by the employment growth of the city, sustainability index of the building, and supply constraint in the market.
At APG Asset Management, the data that are stored in Samuel’s brain are stored in a graph database as
so-called triples, meaning that each fact is stored as a relation in the form of a subject–predicate–object triple,
where the predicate defines the relation between the subject and the object. Exhibit 2 shows an example of
triples and the technology stack.

Exhibit 2. Examples of Triples and the Technology Stack
Subject
Processed by ETL Tools

Building 1
Building 1

Predicate
is a
Is located in

Object
office
amsterdam

has population
Instances = Actual data

amsterdam
amsterdam

Knowledge Graph
netherlands
Ontology = Data model
office
Triplestore database
Is located in
Ontology management tool

Is located in

800000
is located in
is located in
is a subclass of
domain
range

…

netherlands
europe
building
building
area

Source: APG Asset Management.

Based on the relations shown in Exhibit 2, Samuel can infer by itself additional triples, such as the number
of buildings owned by a certain company in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, or Europe. Exhibit 3 shows a more
complex example.
Storing information as triples with their relations allows for advanced questions where part of the answer is reasoned by a reasoner applied on top of the graph database. The following are examples of advanced questions:
What are the principles that determine the quality of an office? What is the supporting evidence that employment growth is important for the quality of an office asset? What are the supporting arguments for the attractiveness of the office building “La Défense”? The triples are stored according to W3C standards, which makes
retrieving and inference possible because you can use generic tools that work on these standards.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

133

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 3. More Complex Example of Inferred Triples
Employment Elasticity
Office jobs employment growth
Occupied stock growth
4%
3%

Delas(1): ∆y/∆x = 1.2x

2%

City
located in

Paris

entry yield >
warranted yield

supporting
evidence

criteria

principle

geo-coordinates
48.890, 2.242
energy label

Investment

–3%

principle

Attractive
Investment

La Défense

sector
entry yield

principle

B-label
Office

–
–1%
–2%

+10yr employ. growth
6%
+10yr supply as % of stock
9%

1%

Employ. Growth
Principle

measured by

+10yr employ.
growth

criteria

>5% p.a.

Supply Prospects measured by
Principle
criteria
Sustainability
Principle

measured by
criteria

Sector

3.5%
A++ Office

‘02 ‘04 ‘06 ‘08 ‘10 ‘12 ‘14 ‘16 ‘18E

warranted yield

+10yr supply
as % of stock
<10%
energy label
higher than C

3.2%

Source: APG Asset Management.

The advantages of using a graph database to store the information are that it is easy to add new types of
data, one can derive new knowledge based on the existing triples, and all data and metadata are stored in
the same repository (which makes data more searchable while also allowing for a rich description of the data
for future interpretation) and a graph database (a database that does not consist of multiple tables that need
to be joined). Both structured and unstructured data can be joined in the same database, as can be seen in
Exhibit 3, where the supporting document for the employment growth principle is also stored in the same
graph database.
In the example in Exhibit 3, the calculation engine is Python scripts that are run on a server. A scheduled
job imports, for example, the employment growth per city via an application programming interface (API)
from an external provider. The graph database identifies this update as a trigger to start inferencing whether
“La Défense” still is an A++ quality building given that the employment growth outlook for Paris has changed.
In the example, the main interaction tool is the cloud-based discounted cash flow (DCF) model. This model is
deeply embedded in the day-to-day workflow of the human portfolio manager. In this cloud-based DCF model,
Samuel can provide its suggestions for the rental growth as a field right next to the rental growth input field. As
such, whenever the portfolio manager (PM) needs to enter a growth rate assumption, Samuel’s suggested value
is always at hand.
Exhibit 4 provides an example of how a news email about a real estate transaction can be read with natural
language processing techniques and translated into triples for the graph database. The news item reads that
the company Landsec acquired a stake in a building called MediaCity. The details of the deal can be recorded
as triples and serve as input—for example, the quality assessment of the portfolio of buildings of the company
Landsec.

134

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 4. Example News Email
Kempen Daily
Landsec today announces that it has acquired
a majority stake in MediaCity, a 37 acre media,
digital and tech office hub in Clichy, previously
owned by a 50:50 JV between Legal & General
and Peel L&P. Landsec will partner with Peel L&P
who will retain a 25% stake and continue to serve
as asset and development manager. MediaCity has
a gross asset value of £567.5m. The location hosts
tenants such as BBC North and ITV to Ericsson,
The Hut Group, Kellogg's and over 250 creative
and tech businesses as well as schools and
universities. It is home to 8,000 residents. Landsec
said that the scheme was renovated 10 years ago
to improve its energy efficiency label to B. It is 96%
let with a WAULT of just under 10 years. It generates
£31.1m of net operating income per annum (100%),
reflecting a 3.15% net initial yield.

Landsec
stake
MediaCity
size
sector
location
gav

37 acres

yield

A++ Office

3.25%

Office
Clichy

location

£567.5m

energy label

warranted
APG yield

Paris
market evidence

B label
3.15%

Source: APG Asset Management.

How Do PMs Interact
with Samuel?
Interaction with Samuel during the investment process can
be grouped into four types: evaluating the buy/hold/sell
decision, preparing the proposal, portfolio monitoring, and
letting Samuel learn.
The evaluation of the final decision is the moment where
the human-proposed action is ranked by Samuel versus all
other potential actions. If other actions are more favorable,
the portfolio managers that do the proposal will have to
explain why they deviate from Samuel.
In preparation of the investment proposal, the human portfolio manager can be helped by Samuel with contextualized
information. For example, while making the DCF model,
Samuel can provide default values. The human PM can
decide whether to overwrite the assumption or stick with
Samuel’s assumption.
Compared to the human team, Samuel excels in portfolio
monitoring. Samuel collects the characteristics to monitor
from each individual investment and contains the portfolio
construction principles. As an example, each investment is
mapped to countries and sectors, all stored in the knowledge base, complemented by the maximum weights that

are desired in a country or sector. Samuel can check every
day whether the aggregated investment exposure to a
country or sector exceeds the limits. This repetitive work
fits Samuel well because it comes at limited cost to schedule a daily execution of the check. Variables to monitor,
such as the valuations of investments, leverage, and the
beta of the portfolio, can be added at a low cost. The more
variables of the investment portfolio are monitored, the
bigger the difference between human and Samuel’s execution in terms of consistency and effort.
The last interaction discussed here is a flow of information
from the human portfolio manager to Samuel. Whenever
after reconciliation of the proposed action with Samuel
a consistent omission in Samuel’s reasoning is found, its
principles need to be adjusted. Doing so requires that the
omission be made explicit, and it has to be made clear
what new principles need to be added. This adjustment
requires a well-facilitated discussion and the embedding
of the new principles and potential new data sources in
Samuel. This process needs to be guided. The continuous learning aspect is critical. Samuel learns by adding
new rules and new data pipelines that provide the data
on which the rules are applied. In this way, the rankings
become more and more sophisticated and the default
values harder to ignore.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

135

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Use Case APG Real Estate (continued)
Within the real estate team at APG Asset Management, Samuel is embedded in the investment process in
several ways. The global team covers an investment universe of 300 listed real estate companies and sources
hundreds of private investment opportunities annually. As such, there is a high volume of investment proposals
that need to be evaluated.
Each investment proposal is discussed by the team in an initial phase. A subteam of the global real estate team
is tasked with interpreting the outcomes of Samuel and challenging the proposal on the basis of Samuel’s input
during the discussion. After this initial screening, all attractive propositions are worked out in more detail, and
then they are presented to the Real Estate Investment Committee. The output of the digital colleague also is
presented to the committee.
While building the proposal, the portfolio manager is helped by contextualized suggestions embedded in the
workflow. The cash flow model is cloud based and transparent for all members of the investment team globally.
Samuel interacts with the human portfolio manager by providing contextualized information within the model in
the form of references, such as growth expectations from external research providers, or default values, such
as data-generated rental growth forecasts and discount rates. In our example of rental growth, the PM sees a
proposed rental growth generated by Samuel. The PM can click through via the web browser to the components.
Then, each component, such as the quality rating, is further substantiated.
Another argument, besides the output of the DCF, is, for example, portfolio fit: How does this fit in the top-down
vision on sector and countries, and how does this contribute to environmental, social, and governance (ESG)
goals? Samuel provides an automatic assessment of these factors to be used in the proposal. Whenever there
are reasons to deviate, these can be addressed in the proposal.

How Does Samuel Improve
Results?
Building and maintaining an automated system such as
Samuel requires attention to the investment process on a
higher abstraction level than a typical portfolio manager is
used to. It demands attention for when and which information is needed for which decision. It also involves skills that
are not traditionally available in a fundamental investment
team, such as ontology building, data engineering, and
software engineering.
These skills can be embedded in the organization in various
ways, ranging from being centrally located to being located
within the investment team (T-shaped teams) or within
each investment professional (T-shaped skills). T-shaped
teams are crucial for the development and maintenance
of a recommender system such as Samuel. A T-shaped
team is a team that contains individuals with the traditional
investment skill sets, those with the data- and technology-related skill sets, and those with a mix of these skill sets
(CFA Institute 2021).

136

CFA Institute Research Foundation

The advantages of collaborating with a digital colleague are
threefold. First, it improves decision making by countering
human cognitive biases. A simple rule-based model tends
to outperform human judgment (Kahneman, Sibony, and
Sunstein 2021) because cognitive biases cause bias in
decision making. By codifying best practices and applying
them consistently, Samuel improves decision quality. There
is usually unwanted variation in human decision making
that is not warranted by the facts. This noise can be across
persons or from the same person at different times. Experts
typically believe they are themselves consistent and
believe that other experts would decide in a similar fashion as themselves. However, research by Kahneman et al.
(2021) shows that, for example, underwriting experts who
are presented the same case have material differences
in their judgments. Samuel makes judgments based on
agreed-on principles and guidelines and, as such, provides
a consistent benchmark.
The second advantage is that it is more transparent.
Transparency in decision making allows the investment team
to explain clearly to clients and stakeholders how their decision was formed. For example, you can track how responsible investment considerations affect your decision making.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

The third advantage is improved efficiency of the decision-making process and results. The final decision is
supported by arguments, and these arguments are the
result of many decisions on a lower level that are typically
less complex and made more frequently, some of which
can be externally sourced and provided via Samuel. Another
example of a lower-level decision that can be automated
to a high degree would be the building blocks for the discount rate that is used. Many of these can be automatically
updated by Samuel.
Although Samuel is a valuable addition to any investment
team, it is also worthwhile to discuss the edge of the
human portfolio manager over Samuel and show why a
collaboration is so important.
First, humans can form a vision of the future and adjust
their assumptions toward that future. Samuel relies on
principles that were formed in the past (by humans) and
might not yet have been adjusted to a new reality, such
as in March 2020 when COVID-19 was affecting the world.
A human portfolio manager knows when old principles are
not applicable anymore given that the circumstances have
changed.
Second, Samuel likely cannot operate on its own. Although
parts of arguments can be input automatically with data
from external sources combined with predefined principles,
there are also many assumptions for which you need a
human eye. Samuel uses the human assumptions where
needed and takes its own assumptions if data and principles are available. In that sense, the output of Samuel is
also based on human input.

Lastly, there are likely edge cases in which the systematic
way of thinking does not translate well. These cases must
be recognized by humans. In the end, Samuel bases its
decision on a simplified model of reality.

Conclusion
The role of machines in the decision-making process will
grow. Having a digital portfolio manager on the team can
improve the quality of decision making, transparency,
and efficiency. To build and maintain an automated digital
portfolio management solution, it is necessary to embed
nontraditional investment skill sets, such as ontology building, data engineering, and software engineering, within the
investment department.

References
CFA Institute. 2021. “T-Shaped Teams: Organizing to Adopt
AI and Big Data at Investment Firms.” www.cfainstitute.
org/-/media/documents/article/industry-research/
t-shaped-teams.pdf.
Kahneman, Daniel, Olivier Sibony, and Cass Sunstein. 2021.
Noise: A Flaw in Human Judgment. New York: Little, Brown
Spark.
Russell, Stuart, and Peter Norvig. 2020. Artificial Intelligence:
A Modern Approach, 4th US ed. Hoboken, NJ: Prentice Hall.

CFA Institute Research Foundation

137

Named Endowments
CFA Institute Research Foundation acknowledges with sincere gratitude the generous contributions of the Named
Endowment participants listed below.
Gifts of at least US$100,000 qualify donors for membership in the Named Endowment category, which recognizes
in perpetuity the commitment toward unbiased, practitioner-oriented, relevant research that these firms and
individuals have expressed through their generous support of CFA Institute Research Foundation.
Ameritech
Anonymous
Robert D. Arnott
Theodore R. Aronson, CFA
Asahi Mutual Life Insurance Company
Batterymarch Financial Management
Boston Company
Boston Partners Asset Management, L.P.
Gary P. Brinson, CFA
Brinson Partners, Inc.
Capital Group International, Inc.
Concord Capital Management
Dai-Ichi Life Insurance Company
Daiwa Securities
Mr. and Mrs. Jeffrey Diermeier
Gifford Fong Associates
John A. Gunn, CFA
Investment Counsel Association of America, Inc.
Jacobs Levy Equity Management
Jon L. Hagler Foundation
Long-Term Credit Bank of Japan, Ltd.
Lynch, Jones & Ryan, LLC
Meiji Mutual Life Insurance Company

Miller Anderson & Sherrerd, LLP
John B. Neff, CFA
Nikko Securities Co., Ltd.
Nippon Life Insurance Company of Japan
Nomura Securities Co., Ltd.
Payden & Rygel
Provident National Bank
Frank K. Reilly, CFA
Salomon Brothers
Sassoon Holdings Pte. Ltd.
Scudder Stevens & Clark
Security Analysts Association of Japan
Shaw Data Securities, Inc.
Sit Investment Associates, Inc.
Standish, Ayer & Wood, Inc.
State Farm Insurance Company
Sumitomo Life America, Inc.
T. Rowe Price Associates, Inc.
Templeton Investment Counsel Inc.
Frank Trainer, CFA
Travelers Insurance Co.
USF&G Companies
Yamaichi Securities Co., Ltd.

Senior Research Fellows
Financial Services Analyst Association
For more on upcoming CFA Institute Research Foundation publications
and webcasts, please visit www.cfainstitute.org/research/foundation.

CFA Institute
Research Foundation
Board of Trustees
2022–2023
Chair

Frank Fabozzi, CFA*
The Johns Hopkins University
Carey Business School

Aaron Low, PhD, CFA
LUMIQ

Vice Chair

Margaret Franklin, CFA
CFA Institute

Joanne Hill, PhD
Cboe Vest LLC

Heinz Hockmann, PhD
Lovell Minnick Partners LLC

Aaron Brown, CFA
City of Calgary

Punita Kumar-Sinha, CFA
Infosys

Kati Eriksson, CFA
Danske Bank

Lotta Moberg, PhD, CFA
William Blair
Maureen O’Hara, PhD*
Cornell University

Bill Fung, PhD
Aventura, FL

Amra Balic
BlackRock

Kingpai Koosakulnirund, CFA
CFA Society Thailand

Dave Uduanu, CFA
Sigma Pensions Ltd
Kurt D. Winkelmann
Navega Strategies, LLC

*Emeritus

Officers and Directors
Executive Director

Secretary

Bud Haslett, CFA
CFA Institute

Jessica Lawson
CFA Institute

Gary P. Brinson Director of Research
Laurence B. Siegel
Blue Moon Communications

Treasurer
Kim Maynard
CFA Institute

Research Director
Luis Garcia-Feijóo, CFA, CIPM
Coral Gables, Florida

Research Foundation Review Board
William J. Bernstein, PhD
Efficient Frontier Advisors

Paul D. Kaplan, PhD, CFA
Morningstar, Inc.

Krishna Ramaswamy, PhD
University of Pennsylvania

Elroy Dimson, PhD
Cambridge Judge Business
School

Robert E. Kiernan III
Advanced Portfolio Management

Andrew Rudd, PhD
Advisor Software, Inc.

Stephen Figlewski, PhD
New York University

Andrew W. Lo, PhD
Massachusetts Institute
of Technology

Stephen Sexauer
Allianz Global Investors Solutions

William N. Goetzmann, PhD
Yale School of Management

Alan Marcus, PhD
Boston College

Elizabeth R. Hilpman
Barlow Partners, Inc.

Paul O’Connell, PhD
FDO Partners

Lee R. Thomas, PhD
Pacific Investment Management
Company

ISBN 978-1-952927-33-1

Available online at www.cfainstitute.org

9 781952 927331

