7. MACHINE LEARNING AND BIG DATA TRADE
EXECUTION SUPPORT
Erin Stanton
Global Head of Analytics Client Support, Virtu Financial

Introduction
As a result of recent advances in computing power, data
abundance, and cloud services, asset managers are
increasingly eager to use artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML) solutions to unearth meaningful
insights from their data. However, despite their willingness and investment, many buy-side firms are struggling
to establish an efficient and programmatic way to do
ML-based analytics at scale. Why are these efforts failing
to meet expectations?

help inform a direction to take when unforeseeable events
occur or ML-powered solutions that overcome limitations by
using data gathered from other industries.
In this chapter, five use cases detail real-life examples
of ML’s application in the analytics and trading spaces,
while noting both the effective combination of data and
ML-based techniques used to enrich the decision-support
processes and some of the current barriers facing buy-side
firms as the technology matures. Here is a synopsis:
•

Use Case 1: Feature Importance. Designed to reduce
the number of inputs a trader needs to consider
when selecting the optimal trading strategy, feature
importance calculates a score or rank for each input
in a model. It is common for trading blotters to contain dozens, if not hundreds, of different security and
market metrics, so using an ML-based approach can
help traders focus on the most meaningful factors.

•

Use Cases 2 and 3: Transaction Cost Analysis (TCA).
Portfolio managers and traders use TCA to learn from
post-trade data and to improve future performance.
In searching for trends about which strategies work,
data are typically broken down by components, such
as the size of the order or the market cap of the stock.
In Use Cases 2 and 3, different ML-based approaches
help extract additional insights from existing trade
data to further enhance TCA analysis.

•

Use Case 4: Normalized and Unbiased Algo Trading.
The automated, randomized testing performed by algo
wheels helps traders find the best trading algorithm
across a variety of brokers; it is like the A/B testing an
e-commerce site would run to find the best product.
Just like a retailer needs to ensure consistency of
service for its customers, a data analyst must be
aware that, aside from the testing component itself,
all testers receive the same experience. In comparing algo wheel orders, a trader must account
for the different order characteristics and market
characteristics that each broker receives. Traditional
market impact models are built statistically, but now,
based on the size and scope of available data, it is
possible to handicap brokers using ML-based models.

•

Use Case 5: Trading Strategy Recommendation
Model. In Use Cases 1–4, traders had to select the
optimal trading strategy. In Use Case 5, an ML-based

Making Sense of the Data
As asset managers push their competitive edge into the
digital sphere, AI/ML solutions are growing out of the necessity for better and faster processes, calculated decisions,
and data-driven insights. In the TRADE’s October 2020 article
“Buy-Side Lags behind Sell-Side in Adoption of Machine
Learning and Artificial Intelligence,” a Refinitiv study found
that only 28% of buy-side firms were leveraging ML and AI
(Smith 2020). This lag was recently confirmed by a Q1 2022
Quant Strats survey of 100 hedge funds, asset managers,
and investment banks across the United States and Canada
that pegged regular use of machine learning in decision
making at 22% (Finadium 2022). Anecdotally, a different picture is emerging, one fueled by significant buy-side interest
and active ML skill building and development.
Like the chicken and egg paradox, the buy side needs
advanced technology and established efficient processes
to capture and store data in sufficient granularity and
requires ML expertise to help sift through the reams of
structured and unstructured data. Though buy-side traders
still consider sourcing liquidity their biggest challenge—one
that statistical algorithms cannot easily solve—they recognize the advantages of ML-assisted approaches. Based on
our observations, data delay and capture capabilities are
improving and there is enthusiasm for putting existing data
to work. ML’s abilities to uncover patterns in large datasets
and surface correlations that humans cannot detect have
buy-side traders and portfolio managers learning about and
turning to open-source ML libraries, such as scikit-learn,
tools similar to those used by traditional data scientists.
In turn, these budding quasi-data scientists are developing
such ML-based solutions as trigger algorithms that can
92

CFA Institute Research Foundation

© 2023 CFA Institute Research Foundation. All rights reserved.

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

trading strategy recommendation model is offered
with an option to override should the recommendation
not align with the trader’s human intuition and experience. Incidentally, when a trader chooses to override,
this too is captured and can be analyzed to better
enhance the model.

Not All Data Are Created
Equal
Computers cannot make decisions as humans do. Human
decisions are based on heuristics and cognitive biases
against a broad field of attention to fully comprehend an
event. The use of ML-based models depends heavily on
data, and more specifically on granular data, as well as on
the humans that build them. It is important to acknowledge that all ML analyses begin with data, but not all
data are created equal. In addition to the variance in data
quality, humans also add variability via the multiple decisions they make throughout the ML model construction
process.
Advanced models, such as neural networks, make such
firms as Google successful, but they are like black boxes; it
is hard to explain why they come up with the results they
do. In trading, this approach is not optimal. In accordance
with data science best practices, model builders should
consider the following questions carefully during and after
model construction. As a matter of transparency, their
responses should also be included for every model submitted into production.
•

What data were included versus excluded, and why?

•

Assuming the data were available, what would
improve the model?

•

What consistency checks and quality assurances
were performed on the input datasets?

•

What features were included and excluded, and why?

•

What model was chosen, and why?

Use Case 1: The Role of
Feature Importance in TCA
for Auto-Order Routing
Each ML-based model created is an experiment since they
fail as often as they succeed. Sometimes, one may be able
to make a model operational, but the predictive accuracy
is low or the model does not work owing to a technical
problem. Nevertheless, ML techniques are evolving,
reducing the amount of time spent on manual analysis.

1

The feature importance approach is often where most buyside firms start their ML implementation journeys. When
evaluating the performance of a portfolio, a portfolio manager
typically performs an attribution analysis to determine which
stocks contributed positively and negatively. The output information can be used to explain performance to an end client
and/or to predict the viability of future investment decisions.
The process of TCA is a data-driven way traders and portfolio
managers can benefit by reviewing past results. Historically,
TCA has primarily been observational, dissecting the changes
in trading costs into factors, such as liquidity, volatility, and
spread. Ideally, the trader may leverage the enhanced posttrade information when execution planning and when demonstrating or confirming execution quality/best execution.
Although observational TCA is less statistical, it has proven
to be an invaluable tool for bridging the consumer trust gap.
Experience has made clear that it is essential to prove to
your end audience how well their data and processes are
understood before they can be convinced to adopt emerging
technologies, such as AI and ML; TCA has been an effective
catalyst toward ML-based analytics. Usually, once a client
gains confidence in traditional TCA capabilities, their thinking
leads them to ask whether anything is missing. For Harris
Associates, their search led them to the feature importance
approach for auto-routing execution, according to Jason
Siegendorf, the firm’s head of trading analytics:
Harris Associates had previously set up a workflow within our execution management system
to auto-route or send a subset of trades directly
to a pre-defined algorithmic trading strategy,
bypassing the trading desk. This enabled cash
flows and other low risk orders to be traded very
consistently and without trader bias in broker
selection and allowed our traders to focus on the
orders that they can have the most impact on
by sourcing liquidity and deciding on the optimal
execution strategy. We know that order size is an
important consideration when deciding if an order
is auto-routing eligible, but we also wondered if
there might be other contributing factors we were
missing out on. Applying the feature importance
function confirmed our intuition and helped spotlight other meaningful order characteristics we
typically pay less attention to.1
Typically, a human trader’s execution decision making
involves the synthesis and weighing of dozens of inputs
to make instant decisions regarding how to best execute
an order. However, brain processing studies show that
interactions are limited to three, sometimes four, inputs
(Cowan 2001). The feature importance approach assists
human traders by statistically confirming observational

Jason Siegendorf, personal communication with author.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

93

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

TCA and human intuition by explaining subtle post-trade
transaction cost patterns that may have otherwise gone
undetected. It can also be used as a guide for pre-trade
and auto-routing strategies.
The recommended ML-based approach for this use case
was a supervised random forest model2 (feature importance is built in natively); however, some buy-side clients
may prefer the straightforward linear regression3 approach.
Most traders are already familiar with the linear regression
coefficients, which can be used to determine the direction
and impact of a specific feature.

•

As inputs, labeled datasets are required for the supervised model. Following the selection of which labeled
dataset(s) to use, it is necessary to further separate the
data into training and testing subsets. Model builders
must reserve a portion of the data for testing to determine how well the model predicts with data it has not
previously interacted with, also known as generalization.
•

Step 1: Cleansing and Normalizing Data
Any ML-based process must first identify the right data
for the intended objective and determine whether any
data normalization is required. Although not explored in
this article, most of a model builder’s time is spent on the
data—data cleansing, normalizing, and removing outliers
and blank values—in addition to selecting and normalizing features before they can be passed into the model.

•

•

■

■

■

Have the drivers of trading costs changed over
time? Ideally, the data should be broken down into
time periods (e.g., month, quarter) and a separate
model should be run for each. When completed, the
model builder can compare the feature importance
for each distinct period and determine whether
drivers of costs have shifted or stayed the same.
What are the cost drivers between two types of
order flow? A trader may want to know the difference in transaction costs between single-stock
versus program trading flow, so the data would
be chunked into two respective datasets and
modeled separately.
Do transaction costs differ by fund type? To
understand the cost impacts on small-cap cap
growth and large-cap cap value, for instance,
a trader would need to segment the data into
relevant attribute datasets and then run a model
for each attribute to pinpoint the most important
drivers of the transaction costs.

Step 5: Selecting the ML Model’s Library and Training
a Supervised Model
Among the open-source ML libraries, scikit-learn is
a popular option, and since the use case involved
predicting continuous trading costs rather than discrete ones, the RandomForestRegressor was chosen.
Despite spending less time tweaking the model to
improve accuracy, its predictive power remains a significant factor when analyzing the feature importance.

Step 2: Chunking (Breaking Down) Data into Subsets
for Easier Interpretation
The following examples illustrate how chunking
(breaking down) data into smaller subsets enhances
understanding:

Step 4: Selecting the Model’s Features
When selecting the model’s inputs, avoid using a
‘kitchen sink’ approach that includes every possible
driver of transaction costs since this type of model
does not perform well with highly correlated inputs.
Several techniques exist to identify and remove the
highly correlated features; it is a step in the process.

The following steps taken in this use case can be implemented for any ML-based model.
•

Step 3: Data Labeling and Testing and Training
Datasets

•

Step 6: Selecting a Feature Importance Approach
Finally, the model builder must identify the most
influential inputs for model prediction. Here are a few
techniques:
■

■

Default scikit-learn’s feature importance.
Informally looks at how much each feature is
used in each tree within the training forest.
Exhibit 1 shows an example output from the
scikit-learn feature importance module.
•

Pros: Single command to retrieve and fast

•

Cons: Can be biased to continuous features
and high-cardinality categorical features; can
only be run on the user’s training dataset

Permutation feature importance. Shuffles a
feature to see how much the model changes its
prediction accuracy.
•

Pros: Can be run on both testing and training
datasets

•

Cons: More computationally expensive and
can overestimate the importance of correlated features

A random forest grows multiple decision trees that are merged for more accurate predictions. The reasoning behind these models is that
multiple uncorrelated models (i.e., individual decision trees) achieve much better performance as a group than individually.
2

The simple linear regression forecasting method can be used to plot a trend line based on relationships between dependent and independent
variables. In linear regression analysis, changes in a dependent variable are shown on the y-axis and changes in the explanatory variable are
shown on the x-axis.
3

94

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 1. Selecting Feature Importance
Feature

Weight
0.2904 ± 0.0302

tradeHorizon

01733 ± 0.0100

tradedValue

Expected Results Sample

0.1663 ± 0.0131

historicalVolatility

0.1217 ± 0.0137

participationRate

0.0560 ± 0.0111

percentMDV

The trading horizon is the most important factor influencing
transaction costs, followed by traded value and historic volatility.
Traders can use this to explain transaction costs post-trade and
to inform them of the costs before placing an order in the market
(pre-trade).

0.0523 ± 0.0094

spread

0.0310 ± 0.0042

marketCap

0.0230 ± 0.0041

sector

0.0064 ± 0.0053

securityType

0.0022 ± 0.0013

side

0 ± 0.0000

country

Source: Virtu Analytics.

■

■

Drop column feature importance. Manually
drop one feature and examine model prediction
accuracy.

and semisupervised approaches are explored for populating
tags where data are missing, and in the next use case, I
examine these approaches for parsing free-form text.

•

Pros: Highly intuitive and accurate

•

Cons: Need to retrain the model each time,
which can be resource-intensive

The objective for this use case is to determine the type of
commission rate when the data populating the commission-type tag are missing. The example is useful because it
illustrates that model builders might have to get creative in
how to use the data they have—solving the problem using
a different tack.

Feature importance computed with Shapley
additive explanation (SHAP) values. Uses the
SHAP values from game theory to estimate how
each feature contributes to the prediction.
•

Pros: Provides more information through
decision and dependence plots and impact
directionality

•

Cons: Can be computationally expensive and
requires a separate library

Use Case 2: Semisupervised
Learning to Cluster Similar
Orders Where Clear Tags
Are Missing
The lack of clear and consistent data tags is one of the biggest hurdles ML must overcome. Currently, vast amounts of
data are either untagged, in free-form text, or hard to integrate into the core dataset. In this use case, unsupervised

ML-based techniques can be applied more broadly to identify segments of orders that are similarly structured across
a range of partially or fully untagged attributes. Examples
include the following:
•

In cases where the fund is not consistently tagged,
details such as the number of stocks, average market
cap, average momentum, and volatility can be used to
extrapolate the style of investment strategy.

•

In cases where a trading desk discretionary tag is
not consistently tagged, details around the order
horizon, the type of algorithm used, the observed
transaction costs, and the existence of a limit price
can be used to extrapolate whether the buy-side
trading desk had full discretion over the trading strategy of the order.

In contrast with the first use case, Use Case 2 has only a
small segment of clearly labeled data, so model builders

CFA Institute Research Foundation

95

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Illustrative Example of Using Semisupervised Learning
to Solve a Long-Running Data Tagging Issue
Any time data are sourced from multiple systems,
such as from multiple trading systems, data tagging
can become an issue. An example is that while some
trading platforms easily capture the type of commission rate paid with a trade, many do not. Buy-side
traders want to be able to compare their commission
rates to a large peer-based database to get a sense of
how much relative commission they are paying.

While not easily solvable with traditional observation-based analytics, semisupervised learning allows
for the training of a model that can learn off clearly
tagged examples and then predict the commission
type for trades that do not have clear tagging. The
buy-side trader can now compare her execution-only
rate on an apples-to-apples basis to other investment
managers.

could choose to implement an unsupervised or semisupervised approach.4

k-prototype clustering algorithm that combines both
approaches into one (Huang 1998).

As previously noted, ML model construction requires significant data preparation, and in Use Case 2, this involved the
parsing of the client–broker code as an extrapolated model
feature. While the broker tag itself differs from firm to firm,
many broker destinations indicate the category of commission paid—for instance, brokerA_HT and brokerA_LT—data
that were parsed and tagged as inputs for the model
(Exhibit 2).

When the model is complete, the model builder will have
an output cluster number that, in this example (Exhibit 3),
indicates whether the record represents an execution-only
or a non-execution-only commission rate.
The output cluster number can be used to report the execution-only commission rate; the use case goal was achieved.
Nevertheless, good data science practices require model
builders to review not only results but also the components
of the model. In so doing, the modeler found that the dataset contained more labeled data than expected and re-ran
the model, this time using a semisupervised approach
(some labeled data and some unlabeled data).

If an unsupervised clustering approach is taken, then a
model needs to be selected that allows for both continuous
numerical information, such as the average commission
rate paid, and discrete categorical information, such as
the country the client traded in. Using a k-means algorithm
for the model’s purely numerical input and a k-modes
algorithm for the model’s purely categorical input is recommended. The model builder may also opt for Zhexue Huang’s

In the semisupervised model approach, a small set of data
labels was used to train a supervised classification model,
and once trained, the model could be used to predict the

Exhibit 2. Broker Code Commission Parsed and Data Tagged
Country
(categorical)

Turnover
(numerical)

Avg. Commission
Rate (cps)
(numerical)

Broker
Destination Code
(categorical)

Parsed Broker Code Tag
(categorical)

1

USA

$1,000,000

1

brokerA_LT

Execution Only

1

USA

$2,000,000

4

brokerA_HT

Not Execution Only

2

USA

$1,000,000

1.5

brokerabcd

Unknown

Client ID
(categorical)

Source: Virtu Analytics.

Semisupervised model learning involves a learning problem, as well as the algorithms created for the problem, that pertains to a small amount
of labeled examples and numerous unlabeled examples from which the model learns and makes predictions on new examples.
4

96

CFA Institute Research Foundation

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 3. Model Cluster Output Number Using Parsed and Data Tagged
Broker Commission Code
Country
(categorical)

Turnover
(numerical)

Avg. Commission
Rate (cps)
(numerical)

Broker Destination
Code
(categorical)

Parsed Broker
Code Tag
(categorical)

Model
Output
Cluster #

1

USA

$1,000,000

1

brokerA_LT

Execution Only

1

1

USA

$2,000,000

4

brokerA_HT

Not Execution Only

2

2

USA

$1,000,000

1.5

brokerabcd

Unknown

1

Client ID
(categorical)

Source: Virtu Analytics.

unlabeled portion of the dataset. Even though the model
builder ultimately opted to use the semisupervised method,
the fully unsupervised and semisupervised approaches
yielded similar average execution-only rates. In ML-based
data analysis, reproducibility is an important aspect of
confirming that techniques and approaches are working
as intended.

Use Case 3: Natural
Language Processing to
Parse Free-Form Text Fields
into Data Tags
Frequently, the parsing of inputs is from free-form text,
such as a portfolio manager’s note to a buy-side trader
that might include trading instructions and constraints
that can impact a trade’s outcome. The following are some
examples:
•

Target this order for the close

•

Part of a prog, trade cash neutral

•

Avoid impact, trade in line with volume

A human reader can easily parse this text into a few simple
tags; however, to programmatically extract information
from free-form text fields, model builders must be familiar
with natural language processing (NLP). The goal in Use
Case 3 is to automate what a human can understand on a
more systematic and consistent basis, as follows:
•

Close

•

Program trade

•

Go along

Useful in post-trade learning, parsed tags can provide
a data-driven perspective on how the portfolio manager’s instruction may have affected trading costs, and in

execution planning, they can help the trader better understand what strategies work best based on the instructions
received. NLP can be used against any free-form text field
to help parse out additional information, even though our
examination in this use case focuses on the portfolio
manager’s instructions.
Google’s Bidirectional Encoder Representations from
Transformers (BERT) model was chosen because it has the
capability of enhanced context understanding because
of its process of evaluating text in both left-to-right and
right-to-left directions. As with other models, BERT is open
source and has the advantage of being pretrained on an
enormous dataset. Since its initial launch, BERT has been
adapted into sub-language versions, such as FinBERT,
which handles financial documents, and LEGAL-BERT,
which handles legal documents. The Virtu Analytics team
performs most of its NLP work on an internal JupyterHub,
where they have installed the necessary libraries and built
their codebase; however, AWS SageMaker and Comprehend
can be much quicker to set up. BERT also offers the advantage of being fine-tuned using a relatively small number of
labeled examples, which, due to the size requirements, can
be labeled by humans manually.
At this point, BERT runs like any other supervised method,
producing tagged predictions alongside probability.

Use Case 4: Transaction
Cost/Market Impact
Prediction
Leveraging market impact models, TCA determines
the quality of the execution versus the expected cost.
Currently, various transaction cost outcome prediction
approaches are based on a combination of order characteristics, stock-level market data inputs, and a model
calibration process that incorporates the results of realized
trades.
CFA Institute Research Foundation

97

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

Exhibit 4. Precleansed Data Noise in a Typical Dataset
Ticker

Trade Time

Shares

Volatility

Spread

Observed Transaction
Cost Outcome
(implementation shortfall)

1

AAPL

3/1/2022 10:00 a.m.

1,000

9 bps

10 bps

5 bps

2

AAPL

3/1/2022 10:05 a.m.

1,100

8 bps

9 bps

20 bps

Training
Example

Source: Virtu Analytics.

Building an ML-based model off observed transaction costs
can be challenging because of the data noise in a typical
dataset and the lack of data labeling that hampers the
parsing of text. Exhibit 4 illustrates the problem with data
noise in the use case’s dataset.
The training example in Exhibit 4 shows different observed
transaction cost labels despite nearly identical inputs for
ticker, trade time, shares, volatility, and spread, which can
result in model confusion. Data analysts are advised that
there may be other factors not captured in traditional TCA
analysis that can affect a trade, which can similarly confuse a model. Attempts to estimate market impact using
Virtu’s Global Peer database in its entirety were unsuccessful; however, when filtering off more homogeneous order
flows, such as those from the algo wheel, useful estimates
were obtained.
An algo wheel provides automated, randomized routing to
brokers according to user-defined allocations. When using
an algo wheel, the trader selects the desired algo strategy
and sends the order. Then, the algo wheel’s broker-allocation engine routes the order to a user-defined set of normalized algo strategies. Post-trade data are accumulated
over time (on average, 300 orders per broker represent a
useful dataset) to assess performance and guide future
broker allocations.
An ML-based market impact prediction model can be
applied to cross-firm flows (giving insight into how brokers
perform relative to each other) or to firm-specific flows to
account for specific nuances in their proprietary investment processes. Enrico Cacciatore, senior quantitative
trader and head of market structure and trading analytics
at Voya Financial, explains why this capability matters:
“Performance is what determines which brokers receive
more flow on our algo wheel, and we need to account for
differences in order difficulty across the flow that each of
our counterparties receives. The Machine Learning Market
Impact model we subscribe to allows us to handicap our
brokers while at the same time giving us a sense of what
transaction costs competing firms are achieving.”5

5

Enrico Cacciatore, personal communication with author.

98

CFA Institute Research Foundation

The random forest model was chosen to accomplish the
use case goal for market impact prediction. Several other
model types were tested, including forest-related variations, such as gradient-boosted trees, but a simple random
forest implementation performed the best in this case.
We have found that random forest models provide high
accuracy for our use cases and off our specific dataset,
which includes both numeric and categorical data, and the
results are also quite easy to explain and troubleshoot.
Every model builder is advised to incorporate a third-party
review as an integral step in the construction process.
Non-model builders with knowledge of the dataset, ML, and
subject matter should review the approach with the model
builder(s)—with all participants being strongly encouraged
to challenge the model based on the data, features, and
model type selected.
Use case in point, during our Transaction Cost Impact
Algo Wheel Model peer review, someone raised a potential
endogeneity issue related to a few features that included
order horizons. Even though the order horizon greatly
improved the model’s prediction accuracy, it is directly
controlled by the broker. The purpose of a peer review is
for users to have a common understanding of the model’s
objective so they can assess whether it performed as
intended. In this use case, the peer review team agreed
that the broker had too much control over the order horizon
and the feature was removed from the model.

Use Case 5: Trading Strategy
Recommendation
In Use Cases 1–4, ML-based approaches provided datadriven trade information but left optimal trading strategy
selection to the buy-side trader. In this use case, the
review closes with an ML-based trading strategy recommendation model. Even though this example invokes
greater risk—a suboptimal trading strategy can result in
a higher-cost trade—the reader should now have a better
understanding of ML-based alternative approaches to

Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Big Data Applications in Investments

segment order flow when data tags are unclear, how to
parse free-form text from an ML perspective, and how
market impact estimates can be constructed solely from
observed trades.
This use case’s data represented all algorithmic trades
captured across all brokers from Virtu’s execution management system. Leveraging the model at a firm-specific level
is possible; however, data requirements are more stringent
as accuracy is emphasized when a recommendation is
being submitted.
The feature importance approach was applied to identify the key data inputs for the model, which include the
following:
•

Order attributes, such as the ticker, side, sector, size,
and market cap

•

Stock clustering and NLP techniques, used to fill in
the gaps, such as whether a limit price was set and
whether an urgency setting was used for the algo
trade

•

Real-time market condition metrics, such as relative
volume, volatility, and spread compared with historical
distributions

Random forest models were then trained using historical
data for each of the algorithm trading styles available to a

Effects of Training
with Biased Data
While not discussed previously, if the
datasets used to train machine learning models contain biased data, then
the model predictions will most likely
be biased as well. If most of the training
data for the volume-weighted average
price (VWAP) strategy represented largecap stocks, which inherently have lower
transaction costs, this strategy could look
incorrectly cheap when compared to other
models that have a more representative
training sample. There are several ways
to deal with bias, and it is an important
consideration for any model that is used
directly in the trading space.

buy-side trader, including implementation shortfall, VWAP,
liquidity seeking, and dark.
Finally, the buy-side trader receives a prediction of the
transaction cost outcome based on all available algorithms.
Though it is possible to display only the winning, low-cost
strategy, it is also useful to show the cost and variability of
outputs across all strategies as part of the trader’s implementation display. Separately, some trades will be marked
as not-low-touch-eligible because of the high strategy estimates provided across all models.

Conclusion
Although the use cases presented in this chapter are successful, many experiments do not perform as expected. To
provide some balance, an example of a failed experiment
would be the effort to build a stock clustering model that
could inform a trading strategy. Though the experiment was
successful in clustering stocks by characteristics, it could
not tie them to a model that consistently informed how to
trade them.
ML-based model building can sometimes be creative,
should be collaborative, and is always iterative.

References
Cowan, Nelson. 2001. “The Magical Number 4 in Short-Term
Memory: A Reconsideration of Mental Storage Capacity.”
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24 (1): 87–114. www.
researchgate.net/publication/11830840_The_Magical_
Number_4_in_Short-Term_Memory_A_Reconsideration_of_
Mental_Storage_Capacity.
Finadium. 2022. “Quant Strats Survey Shows ML Adoption
Lagging, Third Party Spend Drops, Quantum Computing
Tops Future Tech” (17 March). https://finadium.com/quantstrats-survey-shows-ml-adoption-lagging-third-partyspend-drops-quantum-computing-tops-future-tech.
Huang, Zhexue. 1998. “Extensions to the k-Means
Algorithm for Clustering Large Data Sets with Categorical
Values.” Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 2:
283–304. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.15.4028&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
Smith, Annabel. 2020. “Buy-Side Lags behind Sell-Side in
Adoption of Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence.”
The TRADE (27 October). www.thetradenews.com/buy-sidelags-behind-sell-side-in-adoption-of-machine-learningand-artificial-intelligence/.