8.1

The Basics of Decision Trees

Decision trees can be applied to both regression and classification problems.
We first consider regression problems, and then move on to classification.

8.1.1

Regression Trees

In order to motivate regression trees, we begin with a simple example.

© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2023
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38747-0_8

regression
tree

331

332

8. Tree-Based Methods
Years < 4.5
|

Hits < 117.5
5.11

6.00

6.74

FIGURE 8.1. For the Hitters data, a regression tree for predicting the log
salary of a baseball player, based on the number of years that he has played in
the major leagues and the number of hits that he made in the previous year. At a
given internal node, the label (of the form Xj < tk ) indicates the left-hand branch
emanating from that split, and the right-hand branch corresponds to Xj ≥ tk .
For instance, the split at the top of the tree results in two large branches. The
left-hand branch corresponds to Years<4.5, and the right-hand branch corresponds
to Years>=4.5. The tree has two internal nodes and three terminal nodes, or
leaves. The number in each leaf is the mean of the response for the observations
that fall there.

Predicting Baseball Players’ Salaries Using Regression Trees
We use the Hitters data set to predict a baseball player’s Salary based on
Years (the number of years that he has played in the major leagues) and
Hits (the number of hits that he made in the previous year). We first remove
observations that are missing Salary values, and log-transform Salary so
that its distribution has more of a typical bell-shape. (Recall that Salary
is measured in thousands of dollars.)
Figure 8.1 shows a regression tree fit to this data. It consists of a series
of splitting rules, starting at the top of the tree. The top split assigns
observations having Years<4.5 to the left branch.1 The predicted salary
for these players is given by the mean response value for the players in
the data set with Years<4.5. For such players, the mean log salary is 5.107,
and so we make a prediction of e5.107 thousands of dollars, i.e. $165,174, for
these players. Players with Years>=4.5 are assigned to the right branch, and
then that group is further subdivided by Hits. Overall, the tree stratifies
or segments the players into three regions of predictor space: players who
have played for four or fewer years, players who have played for five or more
years and who made fewer than 118 hits last year, and players who have
played for five or more years and who made at least 118 hits last year. These
three regions can be written as R1 ={X | Years<4.5}, R2 ={X | Years>=4.5,
Hits<117.5}, and R3 ={X | Years>=4.5, Hits>=117.5}. Figure 8.2 illustrates
1 Both Years and Hits are integers in these data; the function used to fit this tree
labels the splits at the midpoint between two adjacent values.

8.1 The Basics of Decision Trees

333

238

Hits

R3

R1

117.5

R2

1

4.5

24

1

Years

FIGURE 8.2. The three-region partition for the Hitters data set from the
regression tree illustrated in Figure 8.1.

the regions as a function of Years and Hits. The predicted salaries for these
three groups are $1,000×e5.107 =$165,174, $1,000×e5.999 =$402,834, and
$1,000×e6.740 =$845,346 respectively.
In keeping with the tree analogy, the regions R1 , R2 , and R3 are known as
terminal nodes or leaves of the tree. As is the case for Figure 8.1, decision
terminal
trees are typically drawn upside down, in the sense that the leaves are at node
the bottom of the tree. The points along the tree where the predictor space leaf
is split are referred to as internal nodes. In Figure 8.1, the two internal
internal
nodes are indicated by the text Years<4.5 and Hits<117.5. We refer to the node
segments of the trees that connect the nodes as branches.
branch
We might interpret the regression tree displayed in Figure 8.1 as follows:
Years is the most important factor in determining Salary, and players with
less experience earn lower salaries than more experienced players. Given
that a player is less experienced, the number of hits that he made in the
previous year seems to play little role in his salary. But among players who
have been in the major leagues for five or more years, the number of hits
made in the previous year does affect salary, and players who made more
hits last year tend to have higher salaries. The regression tree shown in
Figure 8.1 is likely an over-simplification of the true relationship between
Hits, Years, and Salary. However, it has advantages over other types of
regression models (such as those seen in Chapters 3 and 6): it is easier to
interpret, and has a nice graphical representation.
Prediction via Stratification of the Feature Space
We now discuss the process of building a regression tree. Roughly speaking,
there are two steps.
1. We divide the predictor space — that is, the set of possible values
for X1 , X2 , . . . , Xp — into J distinct and non-overlapping regions,
R1 , R 2 , . . . , R J .

334

8. Tree-Based Methods

2. For every observation that falls into the region Rj , we make the same
prediction, which is simply the mean of the response values for the
training observations in Rj .
For instance, suppose that in Step 1 we obtain two regions, R1 and R2 ,
and that the response mean of the training observations in the first region
is 10, while the response mean of the training observations in the second
region is 20. Then for a given observation X = x, if x ∈ R1 we will predict
a value of 10, and if x ∈ R2 we will predict a value of 20.
We now elaborate on Step 1 above. How do we construct the regions
R1 , . . . , RJ ? In theory, the regions could have any shape. However, we
choose to divide the predictor space into high-dimensional rectangles, or
boxes, for simplicity and for ease of interpretation of the resulting predictive model. The goal is to find boxes R1 , . . . , RJ that minimize the RSS,
given by
J 0
0
(yi − ŷRj )2 ,
(8.1)
j=1 i∈Rj

where ŷRj is the mean response for the training observations within the
jth box. Unfortunately, it is computationally infeasible to consider every
possible partition of the feature space into J boxes. For this reason, we take
a top-down, greedy approach that is known as recursive binary splitting. The
recursive
approach is top-down because it begins at the top of the tree (at which point binary
all observations belong to a single region) and then successively splits the splitting
predictor space; each split is indicated via two new branches further down
on the tree. It is greedy because at each step of the tree-building process,
the best split is made at that particular step, rather than looking ahead
and picking a split that will lead to a better tree in some future step.
In order to perform recursive binary splitting, we first select the predictor Xj and the cutpoint s such that splitting the predictor space into
the regions {X|Xj < s} and {X|Xj ≥ s} leads to the greatest possible
reduction in RSS. (The notation {X|Xj < s} means the region of predictor
space in which Xj takes on a value less than s.) That is, we consider all
predictors X1 , . . . , Xp , and all possible values of the cutpoint s for each of
the predictors, and then choose the predictor and cutpoint such that the
resulting tree has the lowest RSS. In greater detail, for any j and s, we
define the pair of half-planes
R1 (j, s) = {X|Xj < s} and R2 (j, s) = {X|Xj ≥ s},

and we seek the value of j and s that minimize the equation
0
0
(yi − ŷR1 )2 +
(yi − ŷR2 )2 ,
i: xi ∈R1 (j,s)

(8.2)

(8.3)

i: xi ∈R2 (j,s)

where ŷR1 is the mean response for the training observations in R1 (j, s),
and ŷR2 is the mean response for the training observations in R2 (j, s).
Finding the values of j and s that minimize (8.3) can be done quite quickly,
especially when the number of features p is not too large.
Next, we repeat the process, looking for the best predictor and best
cutpoint in order to split the data further so as to minimize the RSS within

8.1 The Basics of Decision Trees

335

R5
t4

X2

X2

R2

R3
R4

t2

R1

t3

t1
X1

X1

X1 ≤ t1

|

X2 ≤ t2

X1 ≤ t3

X2 ≤ t4
R1

R2

R3
X2

R4

X1

R5

FIGURE 8.3. Top Left: A partition of two-dimensional feature space that could
not result from recursive binary splitting. Top Right: The output of recursive
binary splitting on a two-dimensional example. Bottom Left: A tree corresponding
to the partition in the top right panel. Bottom Right: A perspective plot of the
prediction surface corresponding to that tree.

each of the resulting regions. However, this time, instead of splitting the
entire predictor space, we split one of the two previously identified regions.
We now have three regions. Again, we look to split one of these three regions
further, so as to minimize the RSS. The process continues until a stopping
criterion is reached; for instance, we may continue until no region contains
more than five observations.
Once the regions R1 , . . . , RJ have been created, we predict the response
for a given test observation using the mean of the training observations in
the region to which that test observation belongs.
A five-region example of this approach is shown in Figure 8.3.
Tree Pruning
The process described above may produce good predictions on the training
set, but is likely to overfit the data, leading to poor test set performance.
This is because the resulting tree might be too complex. A smaller tree

336

8. Tree-Based Methods

with fewer splits (that is, fewer regions R1 , . . . , RJ ) might lead to lower
variance and better interpretation at the cost of a little bias. One possible
alternative to the process described above is to build the tree only so long
as the decrease in the RSS due to each split exceeds some (high) threshold.
This strategy will result in smaller trees, but is too short-sighted since a
seemingly worthless split early on in the tree might be followed by a very
good split—that is, a split that leads to a large reduction in RSS later on.
Therefore, a better strategy is to grow a very large tree T0 , and then
prune it back in order to obtain a subtree. How do we determine the best prune
way to prune the tree? Intuitively, our goal is to select a subtree that subtree
leads to the lowest test error rate. Given a subtree, we can estimate its
test error using cross-validation or the validation set approach. However,
estimating the cross-validation error for every possible subtree would be too
cumbersome, since there is an extremely large number of possible subtrees.
Instead, we need a way to select a small set of subtrees for consideration.
Cost complexity pruning—also known as weakest link pruning—gives us cost
a way to do just this. Rather than considering every possible subtree, we complexity
consider a sequence of trees indexed by a nonnegative tuning parameter α. pruning
For each value of α there corresponds a subtree T ⊂ T0 such that
weakest link
|T |
0

pruning

0

m=1 i: xi ∈Rm

(yi − ŷRm )2 + α|T |

(8.4)

is as small as possible. Here |T | indicates the number of terminal nodes
of the tree T , Rm is the rectangle (i.e. the subset of predictor space) corresponding to the mth terminal node, and ŷRm is the predicted response
associated with Rm —that is, the mean of the training observations in Rm .
The tuning parameter α controls a trade-off between the subtree’s complexity and its fit to the training data. When α = 0, then the subtree T
will simply equal T0 , because then (8.4) just measures the training error.
However, as α increases, there is a price to pay for having a tree with
many terminal nodes, and so the quantity (8.4) will tend to be minimized
for a smaller subtree. Equation 8.4 is reminiscent of the lasso (6.7) from
Chapter 6, in which a similar formulation was used in order to control the
complexity of a linear model.
It turns out that as we increase α from zero in (8.4), branches get pruned
from the tree in a nested and predictable fashion, so obtaining the whole
sequence of subtrees as a function of α is easy. We can select a value of
α using a validation set or using cross-validation. We then return to the
full data set and obtain the subtree corresponding to α. This process is
summarized in Algorithm 8.1.
Figures 8.4 and 8.5 display the results of fitting and pruning a regression
tree on the Hitters data, using nine of the features. First, we randomly
divided the data set in half, yielding 132 observations in the training set
and 131 observations in the test set. We then built a large regression tree
on the training data and varied α in (8.4) in order to create subtrees with
different numbers of terminal nodes. Finally, we performed six-fold crossvalidation in order to estimate the cross-validated MSE of the trees as

8.1 The Basics of Decision Trees

337

Algorithm 8.1 Building a Regression Tree
1. Use recursive binary splitting to grow a large tree on the training
data, stopping only when each terminal node has fewer than some
minimum number of observations.
2. Apply cost complexity pruning to the large tree in order to obtain a
sequence of best subtrees, as a function of α.
3. Use K-fold cross-validation to choose α. That is, divide the training
observations into K folds. For each k = 1, . . . , K:
(a) Repeat Steps 1 and 2 on all but the kth fold of the training data.
(b) Evaluate the mean squared prediction error on the data in the
left-out kth fold, as a function of α.
Average the results for each value of α, and pick α to minimize the
average error.
4. Return the subtree from Step 2 that corresponds to the chosen value
of α.
a function of α. (We chose to perform six-fold cross-validation because
132 is an exact multiple of six.) The unpruned regression tree is shown
in Figure 8.4. The green curve in Figure 8.5 shows the CV error as a
function of the number of leaves,2 while the orange curve indicates the
test error. Also shown are standard error bars around the estimated errors.
For reference, the training error curve is shown in black. The CV error
is a reasonable approximation of the test error: the CV error takes on its
minimum for a three-node tree, while the test error also dips down at the
three-node tree (though it takes on its lowest value at the ten-node tree).
The pruned tree containing three terminal nodes is shown in Figure 8.1.

8.1.2

Classification Trees

A classification tree is very similar to a regression tree, except that it is
classification
used to predict a qualitative response rather than a quantitative one. Re- tree
call that for a regression tree, the predicted response for an observation is
given by the mean response of the training observations that belong to the
same terminal node. In contrast, for a classification tree, we predict that
each observation belongs to the most commonly occurring class of training
observations in the region to which it belongs. In interpreting the results of
a classification tree, we are often interested not only in the class prediction
corresponding to a particular terminal node region, but also in the class
proportions among the training observations that fall into that region.
The task of growing a classification tree is quite similar to the task of
growing a regression tree. Just as in the regression setting, we use recursive
2 Although CV error is computed as a function of α, it is convenient to display the
result as a function of |T |, the number of leaves; this is based on the relationship between
α and |T | in the original tree grown to all the training data.

338

8. Tree-Based Methods
Years < 4.5

|

RBI < 60.5

Putouts < 82

Hits < 117.5

Years < 3.5

Years < 3.5
5.394

5.487
4.622

6.189

5.183

Walks < 43.5
Runs < 47.5
6.407
6.015
5.571

Walks < 52.5
6.549

RBI < 80.5
Years < 6.5
6.459

7.007

7.289

FIGURE 8.4. Regression tree analysis for the Hitters data. The unpruned tree
that results from top-down greedy splitting on the training data is shown.

binary splitting to grow a classification tree. However, in the classification
setting, RSS cannot be used as a criterion for making the binary splits.
A natural alternative to RSS is the classification error rate. Since we plan
classification
to assign an observation in a given region to the most commonly occurring error rate
class of training observations in that region, the classification error rate is
simply the fraction of the training observations in that region that do not
belong to the most common class:
E = 1 − max(p̂mk ).
k

(8.5)

Here p̂mk represents the proportion of training observations in the mth
region that are from the kth class. However, it turns out that classification
error is not sufficiently sensitive for tree-growing, and in practice two other
measures are preferable.
The Gini index is defined by
G=

K
0

k=1

p̂mk (1 − p̂mk ),

(8.6)

a measure of total variance across the K classes. It is not hard to see
that the Gini index takes on a small value if all of the p̂mk ’s are close to
zero or one. For this reason the Gini index is referred to as a measure of

Gini index

1.0

8.1 The Basics of Decision Trees

339

0.6
0.4
0.0

0.2

Mean Squared Error

0.8

Training
Cross−Validation
Test

2

4

6

8

10

Tree Size

FIGURE 8.5. Regression tree analysis for the Hitters data. The training,
cross-validation, and test MSE are shown as a function of the number of terminal
nodes in the pruned tree. Standard error bands are displayed. The minimum
cross-validation error occurs at a tree size of three.

node purity—a small value indicates that a node contains predominantly
observations from a single class.
An alternative to the Gini index is entropy, given by
entropy
D=−

K
0

p̂mk log p̂mk .

(8.7)

k=1

Since 0 ≤ p̂mk ≤ 1, it follows that 0 ≤ −p̂mk log p̂mk . One can show that
the entropy will take on a value near zero if the p̂mk ’s are all near zero or
near one. Therefore, like the Gini index, the entropy will take on a small
value if the mth node is pure. In fact, it turns out that the Gini index and
the entropy are quite similar numerically.
When building a classification tree, either the Gini index or the entropy
are typically used to evaluate the quality of a particular split, since these
two approaches are more sensitive to node purity than is the classification
error rate. Any of these three approaches might be used when pruning the
tree, but the classification error rate is preferable if prediction accuracy of
the final pruned tree is the goal.
Figure 8.6 shows an example on the Heart data set. These data contain a binary outcome HD for 303 patients who presented with chest pain.
An outcome value of Yes indicates the presence of heart disease based on
an angiographic test, while No means no heart disease. There are 13 predictors including Age, Sex, Chol (a cholesterol measurement), and other heart
and lung function measurements. Cross-validation results in a tree with six
terminal nodes.
In our discussion thus far, we have assumed that the predictor variables take on continuous values. However, decision trees can be constructed
even in the presence of qualitative predictor variables. For instance, in the
Heart data, some of the predictors, such as Sex, Thal (Thallium stress test),

340

8. Tree-Based Methods
Thal:a
|

Ca < 0.5

Ca < 0.5

Slope < 1.5
MaxHR < 161.5

Age < 52

ChestPain:bc

Oldpeak < 1.1
RestECG < 1

Thal:b
ChestPain:a

0.6

RestBP < 157
Chol < 244
MaxHR < 156
Yes
MaxHR < 145.5
No
No
No
Yes

Yes
No

Chol < 244

Sex < 0.5

No

No

No

No

Yes
Yes

No
No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Thal:a
|

0.3

Error

0.4

0.5

Training
Cross−Validation
Test

Ca < 0.5

0.1

MaxHR < 161.5

0.0

0.2

Ca < 0.5

No

ChestPain:bc

10

Yes

No
No

5

Yes

Yes

15

Tree Size

FIGURE 8.6. Heart data. Top: The unpruned tree. Bottom Left: Cross-validation error, training, and test error, for different sizes of the pruned tree. Bottom
Right: The pruned tree corresponding to the minimal cross-validation error.

and ChestPain, are qualitative. Therefore, a split on one of these variables
amounts to assigning some of the qualitative values to one branch and
assigning the remaining to the other branch. In Figure 8.6, some of the internal nodes correspond to splitting qualitative variables. For instance, the
top internal node corresponds to splitting Thal. The text Thal:a indicates
that the left-hand branch coming out of that node consists of observations
with the first value of the Thal variable (normal), and the right-hand node
consists of the remaining observations (fixed or reversible defects). The text
ChestPain:bc two splits down the tree on the left indicates that the left-hand
branch coming out of that node consists of observations with the second
and third values of the ChestPain variable, where the possible values are
typical angina, atypical angina, non-anginal pain, and asymptomatic.
Figure 8.6 has a surprising characteristic: some of the splits yield two
terminal nodes that have the same predicted value. For instance, consider
the split RestECG<1 near the bottom right of the unpruned tree. Regardless
of the value of RestECG, a response value of Yes is predicted for those ob-

8.1 The Basics of Decision Trees

341

servations. Why, then, is the split performed at all? The split is performed
because it leads to increased node purity. That is, all 9 of the observations
corresponding to the right-hand leaf have a response value of Yes, whereas
7/11 of those corresponding to the left-hand leaf have a response value of
Yes. Why is node purity important? Suppose that we have a test observation that belongs to the region given by that right-hand leaf. Then we
can be pretty certain that its response value is Yes. In contrast, if a test
observation belongs to the region given by the left-hand leaf, then its response value is probably Yes, but we are much less certain. Even though
the split RestECG<1 does not reduce the classification error, it improves the
Gini index and the entropy, which are more sensitive to node purity.

8.1.3

Trees Versus Linear Models

Regression and classification trees have a very different flavor from the more
classical approaches for regression and classification presented in Chapters 3
and 4. In particular, linear regression assumes a model of the form
f (X) = β0 +

p
0

Xj βj ,

(8.8)

j=1

whereas regression trees assume a model of the form
f (X) =

M
0

m=1

cm · 1(X∈Rm )

(8.9)

where R1 , . . . , RM represent a partition of feature space, as in Figure 8.3.
Which model is better? It depends on the problem at hand. If the relationship between the features and the response is well approximated by
a linear model as in (8.8), then an approach such as linear regression will
likely work well, and will outperform a method such as a regression tree
that does not exploit this linear structure. If instead there is a highly nonlinear and complex relationship between the features and the response as
indicated by model (8.9), then decision trees may outperform classical approaches. An illustrative example is displayed in Figure 8.7. The relative
performances of tree-based and classical approaches can be assessed by estimating the test error, using either cross-validation or the validation set
approach (Chapter 5).
Of course, other considerations beyond simply test error may come into
play in selecting a statistical learning method; for instance, in certain settings, prediction using a tree may be preferred for the sake of interpretability and visualization.

8.1.4

Advantages and Disadvantages of Trees

Decision trees for regression and classification have a number of advantages
over the more classical approaches seen in Chapters 3 and 4:
! Trees are very easy to explain to people. In fact, they are even easier
to explain than linear regression!

1
0

X2

−2

−1

0
−2

−1

X2

1

2

8. Tree-Based Methods

2

342

−2

−1

0

1

2

−2

−1

1

2

1

2

2
1
−2

−1

0

X2

1
0
−2

−1

X2

0
X1

2

X1

−2

−1

0
X1

1

2

−2

−1

0
X1

FIGURE 8.7. Top Row: A two-dimensional classification example in which the
true decision boundary is linear, and is indicated by the shaded regions. A classical
approach that assumes a linear boundary (left) will outperform a decision tree
that performs splits parallel to the axes (right). Bottom Row: Here the true decision boundary is non-linear. Here a linear model is unable to capture the true
decision boundary (left), whereas a decision tree is successful (right).

! Some people believe that decision trees more closely mirror human
decision-making than do the regression and classification approaches
seen in previous chapters.
! Trees can be displayed graphically, and are easily interpreted even by
a non-expert (especially if they are small).
! Trees can easily handle qualitative predictors without the need to
create dummy variables.
# Unfortunately, trees generally do not have the same level of predictive
accuracy as some of the other regression and classification approaches
seen in this book.
# Additionally, trees can be very non-robust. In other words, a small
change in the data can cause a large change in the final estimated
tree.
However, by aggregating many decision trees, using methods like bagging,
random forests, and boosting, the predictive performance of trees can be
substantially improved. We introduce these concepts in the next section.

8.2 Bagging, Random Forests, Boosting, and Bayesian Additive Regression Trees

8.2

343

Bagging, Random Forests, Boosting, and
Bayesian Additive Regression Trees

An ensemble method is an approach that combines many simple “building
ensemble
block” models in order to obtain a single and potentially very powerful
model. These simple building block models are sometimes known as weak
learners, since they may lead to mediocre predictions on their own.
weak
We will now discuss bagging, random forests, boosting, and Bayesian learners
additive regression trees. These are ensemble methods for which the simple
building block is a regression or a classification tree.

8.2.1

Bagging

The bootstrap, introduced in Chapter 5, is an extremely powerful idea. It is
used in many situations in which it is hard or even impossible to directly
compute the standard deviation of a quantity of interest. We see here that
the bootstrap can be used in a completely different context, in order to
improve statistical learning methods such as decision trees.
The decision trees discussed in Section 8.1 suffer from high variance.
This means that if we split the training data into two parts at random,
and fit a decision tree to both halves, the results that we get could be
quite different. In contrast, a procedure with low variance will yield similar
results if applied repeatedly to distinct data sets; linear regression tends
to have low variance, if the ratio of n to p is moderately large. Bootstrap
aggregation, or bagging, is a general-purpose procedure for reducing the
bagging
variance of a statistical learning method; we introduce it here because it is
particularly useful and frequently used in the context of decision trees.
Recall that given a set of n independent observations Z1 , . . . , Zn , each
with variance σ 2 , the variance of the mean Z̄ of the observations is given
by σ 2 /n. In other words, averaging a set of observations reduces variance.
Hence a natural way to reduce the variance and increase the test set accuracy of a statistical learning method is to take many training sets from
the population, build a separate prediction model using each training set,
and average the resulting predictions. In other words, we could calculate
fˆ1 (x), fˆ2 (x), . . . , fˆB (x) using B separate training sets, and average them
in order to obtain a single low-variance statistical learning model, given by
1
fˆavg (x) =
B

B
0

fˆb (x).

b=1

Of course, this is not practical because we generally do not have access
to multiple training sets. Instead, we can bootstrap, by taking repeated
samples from the (single) training data set. In this approach we generate
B different bootstrapped training data sets. We then train our method on
the bth bootstrapped training set in order to get fˆ∗b (x), and finally average
all the predictions, to obtain
1
fˆbag (x) =
B

B
0
b=1

fˆ∗b (x).

8. Tree-Based Methods

0.20
0.15

Error

0.25

0.30

344

0.10

Test: Bagging
Test: RandomForest
OOB: Bagging
OOB: RandomForest
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Number of Trees

FIGURE 8.8. Bagging and random forest results for the Heart data. The test
error (black and orange) is shown as a function of B, the number of bootstrapped
√
training sets used. Random forests were applied with m = p. The dashed line
indicates the test error resulting from a single classification tree. The green and
blue traces show the OOB error, which in this case is — by chance — considerably
lower.

This is called bagging.
While bagging can improve predictions for many regression methods,
it is particularly useful for decision trees. To apply bagging to regression
trees, we simply construct B regression trees using B bootstrapped training
sets, and average the resulting predictions. These trees are grown deep,
and are not pruned. Hence each individual tree has high variance, but
low bias. Averaging these B trees reduces the variance. Bagging has been
demonstrated to give impressive improvements in accuracy by combining
together hundreds or even thousands of trees into a single procedure.
Thus far, we have described the bagging procedure in the regression
context, to predict a quantitative outcome Y . How can bagging be extended
to a classification problem where Y is qualitative? In that situation, there
are a few possible approaches, but the simplest is as follows. For a given test
observation, we can record the class predicted by each of the B trees, and
take a majority vote: the overall prediction is the most commonly occurring
majority
class among the B predictions.
vote
Figure 8.8 shows the results from bagging trees on the Heart data. The
test error rate is shown as a function of B, the number of trees constructed
using bootstrapped training data sets. We see that the bagging test error
rate is slightly lower in this case than the test error rate obtained from a
single tree. The number of trees B is not a critical parameter with bagging;
using a very large value of B will not lead to overfitting. In practice we

8.2 Bagging, Random Forests, Boosting, and Bayesian Additive Regression Trees

345

use a value of B sufficiently large that the error has settled down. Using
B = 100 is sufficient to achieve good performance in this example.
Out-of-Bag Error Estimation
It turns out that there is a very straightforward way to estimate the test
error of a bagged model, without the need to perform cross-validation or
the validation set approach. Recall that the key to bagging is that trees are
repeatedly fit to bootstrapped subsets of the observations. One can show
that on average, each bagged tree makes use of around two-thirds of the
observations.3 The remaining one-third of the observations not used to fit a
given bagged tree are referred to as the out-of-bag (OOB) observations. We
out-of-bag
can predict the response for the ith observation using each of the trees in
which that observation was OOB. This will yield around B/3 predictions
for the ith observation. In order to obtain a single prediction for the ith
observation, we can average these predicted responses (if regression is the
goal) or can take a majority vote (if classification is the goal). This leads
to a single OOB prediction for the ith observation. An OOB prediction
can be obtained in this way for each of the n observations, from which the
overall OOB MSE (for a regression problem) or classification error (for a
classification problem) can be computed. The resulting OOB error is a valid
estimate of the test error for the bagged model, since the response for each
observation is predicted using only the trees that were not fit using that
observation. Figure 8.8 displays the OOB error on the Heart data. It can
be shown that with B sufficiently large, OOB error is virtually equivalent
to leave-one-out cross-validation error. The OOB approach for estimating
the test error is particularly convenient when performing bagging on large
data sets for which cross-validation would be computationally onerous.
Variable Importance Measures
As we have discussed, bagging typically results in improved accuracy over
prediction using a single tree. Unfortunately, however, it can be difficult to
interpret the resulting model. Recall that one of the advantages of decision
trees is the attractive and easily interpreted diagram that results, such as
the one displayed in Figure 8.1. However, when we bag a large number of
trees, it is no longer possible to represent the resulting statistical learning
procedure using a single tree, and it is no longer clear which variables
are most important to the procedure. Thus, bagging improves prediction
accuracy at the expense of interpretability.
Although the collection of bagged trees is much more difficult to interpret
than a single tree, one can obtain an overall summary of the importance of
each predictor using the RSS (for bagging regression trees) or the Gini index
(for bagging classification trees). In the case of bagging regression trees, we
can record the total amount that the RSS (8.1) is decreased due to splits
over a given predictor, averaged over all B trees. A large value indicates
an important predictor. Similarly, in the context of bagging classification
3 This relates to Exercise 2 of Chapter 5.

346

8. Tree-Based Methods

Fbs
RestECG
ExAng
Sex
Slope
Chol
Age
RestBP
MaxHR
Oldpeak
ChestPain
Ca
Thal

0

20

40

60

80

100

Variable Importance

FIGURE 8.9. A variable importance plot for the Heart data. Variable importance is computed using the mean decrease in Gini index, and expressed relative
to the maximum.

trees, we can add up the total amount that the Gini index (8.6) is decreased
by splits over a given predictor, averaged over all B trees.
A graphical representation of the variable importances in the Heart data
variable
is shown in Figure 8.9. We see the mean decrease in Gini index for each vari- importance
able, relative to the largest. The variables with the largest mean decrease
in Gini index are Thal, Ca, and ChestPain.

8.2.2

Random Forests

Random forests provide an improvement over bagged trees by way of a
random
small tweak that decorrelates the trees. As in bagging, we build a number forest
of decision trees on bootstrapped training samples. But when building these
decision trees, each time a split in a tree is considered, a random sample of
m predictors is chosen as split candidates from the full set of p predictors.
The split is allowed to use only one of those m predictors. A fresh sample of
√
m predictors is taken at each split, and typically we choose m ≈ p—that
is, the number of predictors considered at each split is approximately equal
to the square root of the total number of predictors (4 out of the 13 for the
Heart data).
In other words, in building a random forest, at each split in the tree,
the algorithm is not even allowed to consider a majority of the available
predictors. This may sound crazy, but it has a clever rationale. Suppose
that there is one very strong predictor in the data set, along with a number of other moderately strong predictors. Then in the collection of bagged
trees, most or all of the trees will use this strong predictor in the top split.
Consequently, all of the bagged trees will look quite similar to each other.

8.2 Bagging, Random Forests, Boosting, and Bayesian Additive Regression Trees

347

Hence the predictions from the bagged trees will be highly correlated. Unfortunately, averaging many highly correlated quantities does not lead to
as large of a reduction in variance as averaging many uncorrelated quantities. In particular, this means that bagging will not lead to a substantial
reduction in variance over a single tree in this setting.
Random forests overcome this problem by forcing each split to consider
only a subset of the predictors. Therefore, on average (p − m)/p of the
splits will not even consider the strong predictor, and so other predictors
will have more of a chance. We can think of this process as decorrelating
the trees, thereby making the average of the resulting trees less variable
and hence more reliable.
The main difference between bagging and random forests is the choice
of predictor subset size m. For instance, if a random forest is built using
m = p, then this amounts simply to bagging. On the Heart data, random
√
forests using m = p leads to a reduction in both test error and OOB error
over bagging (Figure 8.8).
Using a small value of m in building a random forest will typically be
helpful when we have a large number of correlated predictors. We applied
random forests to a high-dimensional biological data set consisting of expression measurements of 4,718 genes measured on tissue samples from 349
patients. There are around 20,000 genes in humans, and individual genes
have different levels of activity, or expression, in particular cells, tissues,
and biological conditions. In this data set, each of the patient samples has
a qualitative label with 15 different levels: either normal or 1 of 14 different
types of cancer. Our goal was to use random forests to predict cancer type
based on the 500 genes that have the largest variance in the training set.
We randomly divided the observations into a training and a test set, and
applied random forests to the training set for three different values of the
number of splitting variables m. The results are shown in Figure 8.10. The
error rate of a single tree is 45.7 %, and the null rate is 75.4 %.4 We see that
using 400 trees is sufficient to give good performance, and that the choice
√
m = p gave a small improvement in test error over bagging (m = p) in
this example. As with bagging, random forests will not overfit if we increase
B, so in practice we use a value of B sufficiently large for the error rate to
have settled down.

8.2.3

Boosting

We now discuss boosting, yet another approach for improving the predicboosting
tions resulting from a decision tree. Like bagging, boosting is a general
approach that can be applied to many statistical learning methods for regression or classification. Here we restrict our discussion of boosting to the
context of decision trees.
Recall that bagging involves creating multiple copies of the original training data set using the bootstrap, fitting a separate decision tree to each
copy, and then combining all of the trees in order to create a single predic4 The null rate results from simply classifying each observation to the dominant class
overall, which is in this case the normal class.

8. Tree-Based Methods
m=p
m=p/2
m= p

0.4
0.3
0.2

Test Classification Error

0.5

348

0

100

200

300

400

500

Number of Trees

FIGURE 8.10. Results from random forests for the 15-class gene expression
data set with p = 500 predictors. The test error is displayed as a function of
the number of trees. Each colored line corresponds to a different value of m, the
number of predictors available for splitting at each interior tree node. Random
forests (m < p) lead to a slight improvement over bagging (m = p). A single
classification tree has an error rate of 45.7 %.

tive model. Notably, each tree is built on a bootstrap data set, independent
of the other trees. Boosting works in a similar way, except that the trees are
grown sequentially: each tree is grown using information from previously
grown trees. Boosting does not involve bootstrap sampling; instead each
tree is fit on a modified version of the original data set.
Consider first the regression setting. Like bagging, boosting involves combining a large number of decision trees, fˆ1 , . . . , fˆB . Boosting is described
in Algorithm 8.2.
What is the idea behind this procedure? Unlike fitting a single large decision tree to the data, which amounts to fitting the data hard and potentially
overfitting, the boosting approach instead learns slowly. Given the current
model, we fit a decision tree to the residuals from the model. That is, we
fit a tree using the current residuals, rather than the outcome Y , as the response. We then add this new decision tree into the fitted function in order
to update the residuals. Each of these trees can be rather small, with just
a few terminal nodes, determined by the parameter d in the algorithm. By
fitting small trees to the residuals, we slowly improve fˆ in areas where it
does not perform well. The shrinkage parameter λ slows the process down
even further, allowing more and different shaped trees to attack the residuals. In general, statistical learning approaches that learn slowly tend to
perform well. Note that in boosting, unlike in bagging, the construction of
each tree depends strongly on the trees that have already been grown.
We have just described the process of boosting regression trees. Boosting
classification trees proceeds in a similar but slightly more complex way, and
the details are omitted here.

8.2 Bagging, Random Forests, Boosting, and Bayesian Additive Regression Trees

349

Algorithm 8.2 Boosting for Regression Trees
1. Set fˆ(x) = 0 and ri = yi for all i in the training set.
2. For b = 1, 2, . . . , B, repeat:
(a) Fit a tree fˆb with d splits (d + 1 terminal nodes) to the training
data (X, r).
(b) Update fˆ by adding in a shrunken version of the new tree:
fˆ(x) ← fˆ(x) + λfˆb (x).

(8.10)

(c) Update the residuals,
ri ← ri − λfˆb (xi ).

(8.11)

3. Output the boosted model,
fˆ(x) =

B
0

λfˆb (x).

(8.12)

b=1

Boosting has three tuning parameters:
1. The number of trees B. Unlike bagging and random forests, boosting
can overfit if B is too large, although this overfitting tends to occur
slowly if at all. We use cross-validation to select B.
2. The shrinkage parameter λ, a small positive number. This controls
the rate at which boosting learns. Typical values are 0.01 or 0.001, and
the right choice can depend on the problem. Very small λ can require
using a very large value of B in order to achieve good performance.
3. The number d of splits in each tree, which controls the complexity
of the boosted ensemble. Often d = 1 works well, in which case each
tree is a stump, consisting of a single split. In this case, the boosted stump
ensemble is fitting an additive model, since each term involves only a
single variable. More generally d is the interaction depth, and controls
interaction
the interaction order of the boosted model, since d splits can involve depth
at most d variables.
In Figure 8.11, we applied boosting to the 15-class cancer gene expression
data set, in order to develop a classifier that can distinguish the normal
class from the 14 cancer classes. We display the test error as a function of
the total number of trees and the interaction depth d. We see that simple
stumps with an interaction depth of one perform well if enough of them
are included. This model outperforms the depth-two model, and both outperform a random forest. This highlights one difference between boosting
and random forests: in boosting, because the growth of a particular tree
takes into account the other trees that have already been grown, smaller

8. Tree-Based Methods

0.10

0.15

0.20

Boosting: depth=1
Boosting: depth=2
RandomForest: m= p

0.05

Test Classification Error

0.25

350

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

Number of Trees

FIGURE 8.11. Results from performing boosting and random forests on the
15-class gene expression data set in order to predict cancer versus normal. The test
error is displayed as a function of the number of trees. For the two boosted models,
λ = 0.01. Depth-1 trees slightly outperform depth-2 trees, and both outperform
the random forest, although the standard errors are around 0.02, making none of
these differences significant. The test error rate for a single tree is 24 %.

trees are typically sufficient. Using smaller trees can aid in interpretability
as well; for instance, using stumps leads to an additive model.

8.2.4

Bayesian Additive Regression Trees

Finally, we discuss Bayesian additive regression trees (BART), another enBayesian
semble method that uses decision trees as its building blocks. For simplicity, additive
we present BART for regression (as opposed to classification).
regression
Recall that bagging and random forests make predictions from an aver- trees
age of regression trees, each of which is built using a random sample of data
and/or predictors. Each tree is built separately from the others. By contrast, boosting uses a weighted sum of trees, each of which is constructed
by fitting a tree to the residual of the current fit. Thus, each new tree attempts to capture signal that is not yet accounted for by the current set
of trees. BART is related to both approaches: each tree is constructed in
a random manner as in bagging and random forests, and each tree tries to
capture signal not yet accounted for by the current model, as in boosting.
The main novelty in BART is the way in which new trees are generated.
Before we introduce the BART algorithm, we define some notation. We
let K denote the number of regression trees, and B the number of iterations
for which the BART algorithm will be run. The notation fˆkb (x) represents
the prediction at x for the kth regression tree used in the bth iteration. At
the end of each
)Kiteration, the K trees from that iteration will be summed,
i.e. fˆb (x) = k=1 fˆkb (x) for b = 1, . . . , B.
In the first iteration of the BART algorithm,
all trees are initialized to
)n
1
have a single root node, with fˆk1 (x) = nK
y
,
i=1 i the mean of the response

8.2 Bagging, Random Forests, Boosting, and Bayesian Additive Regression Trees

(a): fˆkb−1 (X)

(b): Possibility #1 for fˆkb (X)

X < 169.17
|

X < 169.17
|

X < 114.305
X < 140.35

X < 114.305

0.4079

0.4221

X < 140.35
−0.5110

−0.5031
0.2667

0.2693

−0.2470

(c): Possibility #2 for fˆkb (X)

−0.2649

(d): Possibility #3 for fˆkb (X)

X < 169.17
|

X < 169.17
|
X < 114.305
X < 106.755

−0.1218

0.4079

−0.05089

−1.03100

X < 140.35

0.26670

0.40790

−0.24700

FIGURE 8.12. A schematic of perturbed trees from the BART algorithm. (a):
The kth tree at the (b − 1)st iteration, fˆkb−1 (X), is displayed. Panels (b)–(d)
display three of many possibilities for fˆkb (X), given the form of fˆkb−1 (X). (b): One
possibility is that fˆkb (X) has the same structure as fˆkb−1 (X), but with different
predictions at the terminal nodes. (c): Another possibility is that fˆkb (X) results
from pruning fˆkb−1 (X). (d): Alternatively, fˆkb (X) may have more terminal nodes
than fˆkb−1 (X).

)K
values
divided by the total number of trees. Thus, fˆ1 (x) = k=1 fˆk1 (x) =
)
n
1
i=1 yi .
n
In subsequent iterations, BART updates each of the K trees, one at a
time. In the bth iteration, to update the kth tree, we subtract from each
response value the predictions from all but the kth tree, in order to obtain
a partial residual
0
0
ri = y i −
fˆkb! (xi ) −
fˆkb−1
(xi )
!
k! <k

k! >k

for the ith observation, i = 1, . . . , n. Rather than fitting a fresh tree to this
partial residual, BART randomly chooses a perturbation to the tree from
the previous iteration (fˆkb−1 ) from a set of possible perturbations, favoring
ones that improve the fit to the partial residual. There are two components
to this perturbation:
1. We may change the structure of the tree by adding or pruning branches.
2. We may change the prediction in each terminal node of the tree.
Figure 8.12 illustrates examples of possible perturbations to a tree.
The output of BART is a collection of prediction models,
fˆb (x) =

K
0

k=1

fˆkb (x), for b = 1, 2, . . . , B.

351

352

8. Tree-Based Methods

Algorithm 8.3 Bayesian Additive Regression Trees
)n
1
1
1. Let fˆ11 (x) = fˆ21 (x) = · · · = fˆK
(x) = nK
i=1 yi .
)K
)n
2. Compute fˆ1 (x) = k=1 fˆk1 (x) = n1 i=1 yi .
3. For b = 2, . . . , B:

(a) For k = 1, 2, . . . , K:
i. For i = 1, . . . , n, compute the current partial residual
0
0
ri = y i −
fˆkb! (xi ) −
fˆkb−1
(xi ).
!
k! <k

k! >k

ii. Fit a new tree, fˆkb (x), to ri , by randomly perturbing the
kth tree from the previous iteration, fˆkb−1 (x). Perturbations
that improve the fit are favored.
)K ˆb
(b) Compute fˆb (x) =
f (x).
k=1

k

4. Compute the mean after L burn-in samples,
fˆ(x) =

B
0
1
fˆb (x).
B−L
b=L+1

We typically throw away the first few of these prediction models, since
models obtained in the earlier iterations — known as the burn-in period
burn-in
— tend not to provide very good results. We can let L denote the number of burn-in iterations; for instance, we might take L = 200. Then, to
obtain a single prediction,
take the average after the burn-in
)B we simply
1
ˆb
iterations, fˆ(x) = B−L
b=L+1 f (x). However, it is also possible to compute quantities other than the average: for instance, the percentiles of
fˆL+1 (x), . . . , fˆB (x) provide a measure of uncertainty in the final prediction. The overall BART procedure is summarized in Algorithm 8.3.
A key element of the BART approach is that in Step 3(a)ii., we do not fit
a fresh tree to the current partial residual: instead, we try to improve the fit
to the current partial residual by slightly modifying the tree obtained in the
previous iteration (see Figure 8.12). Roughly speaking, this guards against
overfitting since it limits how “hard” we fit the data in each iteration.
Furthermore, the individual trees are typically quite small. We limit the
tree size in order to avoid overfitting the data, which would be more likely
to occur if we grew very large trees.
Figure 8.13 shows the result of applying BART to the Heart data, using
K = 200 trees, as the number of iterations is increased to 10, 000. During
the initial iterations, the test and training errors jump around a bit. After
this initial burn-in period, the error rates settle down. We note that there
is only a small difference between the training error and the test error,
indicating that the tree perturbation process largely avoids overfitting.

8.2 Bagging, Random Forests, Boosting, and Bayesian Additive Regression Trees

353

0.3
0.0

0.1

0.2

Error

0.4

0.5

BART Training Error
BART Test Error
Boosting Training Error
Boosting Test Error

5

10

50 100

500

5000

Number of Iterations

FIGURE 8.13. BART and boosting results for the Heart data. Both training
and test errors are displayed. After a burn-in period of 100 iterations (shown in
gray), the error rates for BART settle down. Boosting begins to overfit after a
few hundred iterations.

The training and test errors for boosting are also displayed in Figure 8.13.
We see that the test error for boosting approaches that of BART, but then
begins to increase as the number of iterations increases. Furthermore, the
training error for boosting decreases as the number of iterations increases,
indicating that boosting has overfit the data.
Though the details are outside of the scope of this book, it turns out
that the BART method can be viewed as a Bayesian approach to fitting an
ensemble of trees: each time we randomly perturb a tree in order to fit the
residuals, we are in fact drawing a new tree from a posterior distribution.
(Of course, this Bayesian connection is the motivation for BART’s name.)
Furthermore, Algorithm 8.3 can be viewed as a Markov chain Monte Carlo
Markov
algorithm for fitting the BART model.
chain Monte
When we apply BART, we must select the number of trees K, the number Carlo
of iterations B, and the number of burn-in iterations L. We typically choose
large values for B and K, and a moderate value for L: for instance, K = 200,
B = 1,000, and L = 100 is a reasonable choice. BART has been shown to
have very impressive out-of-box performance — that is, it performs well
with minimal tuning.

8.2.5

Summary of Tree Ensemble Methods

Trees are an attractive choice of weak learner for an ensemble method
for a number of reasons, including their flexibility and ability to handle

354

8. Tree-Based Methods

predictors of mixed types (i.e. qualitative as well as quantitative). We have
now seen four approaches for fitting an ensemble of trees: bagging, random
forests, boosting, and BART.
• In bagging, the trees are grown independently on random samples of
the observations. Consequently, the trees tend to be quite similar to
each other. Thus, bagging can get caught in local optima and can fail
to thoroughly explore the model space.
• In random forests, the trees are once again grown independently on
random samples of the observations. However, each split on each tree
is performed using a random subset of the features, thereby decorrelating the trees, and leading to a more thorough exploration of model
space relative to bagging.
• In boosting, we only use the original data, and do not draw any random samples. The trees are grown successively, using a “slow” learning approach: each new tree is fit to the signal that is left over from
the earlier trees, and shrunken down before it is used.
• In BART, we once again only make use of the original data, and we
grow the trees successively. However, each tree is perturbed in order
to avoid local minima and achieve a more thorough exploration of
the model space.